Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22633-middle-east-respiratory-syndrome-mers

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a severe respiratory illness caused by a virus. It can cause pneumonia and organ failure. It often spreads in hospitals or to other people in the same household. It can also spread from camels to people.

Most cases of MERS happen in Saudi Arabia and surrounding countries. But there have been cases in other countries around the world.

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Middle East respiratory syndrome

MERS symptoms include:

Cough
Fever
Shortness of breath
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
What causes Middle East respiratory syndrome?

MERS-CoV, a type of coronavirus, causes MERS. Coronaviruses also cause COVID-19 and common colds.

You can get MERS from contact with infected respiratory fluids, like mucus and spit (saliva). It can spread:

Through close contact with someone who has it
Through close contact with camels, like grooming
From drinking raw camel milk or eating raw camel meat

It most commonly spreads in hospitals, through family members or through people who live in the same household.

Risk factors

You’re at a higher risk of MERS infection if you:

Live in or have recently traveled to the Arabian Peninsula (Saudi Arabia and its surrounding countries) or another area where MERS is spreading
Had close contact with someone with a confirmed MERS-CoV infection
You’ve taken care of someone with MERS
Have direct contact with camels or consume raw camel meat or milk
Complications of MERS

MERS is often severe, and complications are common. They include:

Kidney failure
Pneumonia
Respiratory failure

You’re more likely to develop severe illness if you have:

Cancer
Cardiovascular disease
Chronic heart disease
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic lung disease
Conditions that weaken your immune system
Diabetes

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose MERS

If you have respiratory symptoms and you live in or have traveled to an area where MERS spreads, a healthcare provider might test you for MERS. Tests could include:

Sputum test
Nasopharyngeal swab
Bronchoscopy
Blood tests

Not all labs do MERS-CoV testing. Your provider may send the samples to a specialized lab for diagnosis.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is MERS treated?

There’s no treatment that gets rid of MERS. Your body has to fight it off on its own. If you’re severely ill and in the hospital, healthcare providers might give you:

IV (intravenous) fluids
Supplemental oxygen
Mechanical ventilation
When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should call your provider if you have symptoms of MERS and:

You live in or have recently traveled to a place where it spreads, especially if you’re a healthcare worker or you’ve had contact with camels
You’ve been in close contact with someone with MERS or someone who’s recently traveled to an area where it spreads

Your provider can let you know which precautions to take and severe symptoms to look out for.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have Middle East respiratory syndrome?

If you have MERS, you should stay away from other people to prevent it from spreading. It can get worse quickly. Go to the hospital if your symptoms are severe. You might need to stay in the hospital to fully recover.

What’s the mortality rate?

About 1 in 3 people with MERS die from it. But experts aren’t sure if there are mild, undiagnosed cases. If so, that might lower the death rate.

Prevention
----------
Can MERS be prevented?

You can reduce your risk of catching and spreading MERS by:

Washing your hands frequently
Covering your nose and mouth when you cough or sneeze
Avoiding being around people when you’re sick
Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces frequently
Washing your hands after touching camels and avoiding contact with sick camels
Not drinking unpasteurized camel milk or eating raw camel meat
Avoiding contact with camels if you have a chronic health condition or compromised immune system

If you’re living with or caring for a person with MERS, health experts recommend additional precautions:

Wear a face mask, gown and gloves (personal protective equipment) if you have contact with the person’s body fluids or secretions.
Wear gloves when handling and washing dishes, towels, bedding and laundry. Wash your hands after removing your gloves.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
MERS is uncommon, but it still exists. And sometimes, outbreaks happen. That’s why it’s always important to talk to your healthcare provider and check public health recommendations before you travel. This can help you know how to avoid getting sick and what to do if you have symptoms.
