Angina
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21489-angina

Overview
--------
Angina feels like pressure, tightness or squeezing in your chest. The discomfort may spread to other parts of your upper body like your arms or jaw.

What is angina?

Angina (commonly pronounced an-JY-nuh) is chest pain or discomfort that happens when your heart isn’t receiving enough blood. Angina is a symptom of heart disease — most commonly plaque buildup or a blockage in your coronary arteries. Without treatment, dangerous complications like a heart attack or cardiac arrest could occur.

About 11 million people in the U.S. experience angina. It’s common and generally treatable. The most important thing you can do is tell your provider about any chest discomfort you feel. This is true even if you think it’s minor. Don’t ignore any new or changing symptoms. Angina can range in severity from a vague ache in your chest to crushing pressure.

Angina can be a warning sign of a heart attack — sometimes days or weeks in advance. If you have unexpected, severe or worsening chest pain, call 911 (or your local emergency services number).

Angina pectoris is another name for this same symptom. But providers usually just call it angina.

What does angina feel like?

Most people with angina describe having chest pressure or pain. It can be mild or more severe. It’s common to feel vague discomfort, rather than actual pain. Angina might feel like:

Squeezing
Tightness
Heaviness
Crushing
Burning, like heartburn or indigestion

This discomfort may spread to your jaw, teeth, shoulders, arm or back.

Angina can happen alongside other symptoms, like:

Sweating
Dizziness
Weakness
Gas or bloating
Upset stomach or nausea
Feeling clammy
Skin that’s paler than usual
Feeling of impending doom
Types of angina

There are four main types of angina:

Stable angina: This is chest discomfort that comes and goes in predictable patterns. Physical activity is a common trigger. Each episode is usually short (about five minutes or less). The discomfort feels the same each time. It doesn’t grow more severe or start happening more often. Rest or medicine makes it go away.
Unstable angina: This is chest discomfort that’s different, more severe or more frequent than usual. It happens without warning and may have no clear triggers. An episode may last longer (15 minutes or more). Rest and medicine usually don’t make it go away. THIS IS A MEDICAL EMERGENCY.
Microvascular angina: Problems with small blood vessels in your heart cause this type of angina. The tightness or pressure can last 15 minutes or more. Treatment can prevent damage to your heart from a lack of oxygen.
Prinzmetal (variant) angina: Coronary artery spasms cause this type of angina. It usually occurs when you’re sleeping or resting. This makes it different from other types. An episode typically lasts five to 15 minutes.

Healthcare providers consider your triggers when describing the severity of your angina. They may use a scale of 1 to 4. The higher the number, the more severe the angina:

1: You have angina only when you’re pushing yourself with physical activity. Your usual activities don’t cause it.
2: Walking or climbing stairs quickly can trigger angina. You may also notice it if you move around after a heavy meal. Cold weather, wind or strong emotions may also cause it.
3: Walking a shorter distance at a normal pace can trigger angina.
4: Any physical activity can trigger angina. You may even have it while resting.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
(Not available)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
(Not available)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
(Not available)

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You’ve probably seen enough movies to know what chest pain looks like. But angina may not make you clutch your chest or collapse. It might not even feel like pain. It may be more subtle. And it may come and go so quickly that you question if it’s even a big deal.

But angina is always worth taking seriously. It’s your heart telling you that something isn’t right. And you should seek medical care. The conditions that cause angina are treatable. The sooner you start treating them, the better.

If you’ve been diagnosed with angina, talk with your provider about what’s “normal” for you. Ask your provider what’s out of the ordinary for you and when you should call 911.
