Ankle Injuries
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/16737-ankle-injuries

Overview
--------
Injuries, arthritis and normal wear and tear are the most common causes of ankle pain.

What is ankle pain?

Ankle pain is any pain or discomfort in your ankle joint.

Your ankle is a complex joint made of:

Bones (your tibia, fibula and talus).
Muscles.
Nerves.
Tendons.
Ligaments.
Blood vessels.

Ankle pain can happen for many reasons. The most common causes include injuries, arthritis and normal wear and tear. Depending on the cause, you may feel pain or stiffness anywhere around your ankle. Your ankle may also swell, and you may not be able to put any weight on it.

Usually, ankle pain gets better with rest, ice and over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications. A healthcare provider will treat injuries and arthritis. Oftentimes, you won’t need surgery to treat these conditions.

Severe ankle injuries — especially broken bones — may require surgery. You might also need surgery if you have severe ankle pain that doesn’t get better after trying other, nonsurgical treatments.

Visit a healthcare provider if you’re experiencing ankle pain that doesn’t go away in a few days, or if the pain is getting worse.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
(Not available)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
(Not available)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
(Not available)

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Why do I have pain in the side of my ankle?

Different injuries or health conditions can cause pain in different locations in or around your ankles. Peroneal tendinitis is inflammation in the tendons that run along your outer ankle bone and the side of your foot. It can cause ankle pain on the outside of your ankle.

Posterior tibial tendinitis is inflammation in one of the tendons that runs along the inside of your ankle and foot. It can cause pain on the inside of your ankle or foot.

Any other injury or condition that causes general ankle pain can also make the sides of your ankles hurt. Visit a healthcare provider no matter where you’re feeling ankle pain if the RICE method or taking NSAIDs at home doesn’t relieve the pain after a few days.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Everyone’s had a sore ankle at some point. But there’s a difference between feeling sore for a day or two and feeling like your ankles are constantly aching. Visit a healthcare provider if ankle pain is an everyday constant for you, or if you know you experienced an ankle injury.

Trust your instincts and listen to your body. People sometimes assume that ankle pain is just a part of getting older or an unavoidable side effect of their jobs or hobbies. You might feel pain every once in a while, but don’t ignore it if it’s been more than a few days in a row since you’ve been pain-free.
