Atopy
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/atopy

Overview
--------
People with atopy tend to have asthma, allergies, eczema and other conditions that have common triggers.

What is atopy?

Atopy is a tendency to develop various types of allergic conditions. Atopy means “out of place,” so atopic conditions are your body’s overreaction to something it shouldn’t react to. It causes your immune system to respond to environmental triggers (like pollen or dust mites) with asthma, skin rashes and allergies.

People with atopy often have more than one of type of atopic condition together. You can think of it like the fact that you might be more likely to wear a hat and a coat if you’re also wearing gloves — the same condition (cold weather) increases the chances that you’ll be wearing more than one type of warm accessory.

What are atopic diseases?

Atopic conditions include:

Some forms of asthma, including allergic asthma.
Allergic rhinitis.
Food allergies.
Eczema or atopic dermatitis.
Some forms of hives (urticaria).
Allergic conjunctivitis.
Eosinophilic esophagitis.
What’s the difference between atopy and allergies?

Atopy is a bit like having allergic reactions that affect different parts of your body. For instance, allergic rhinitis — what people often think of as “allergies” — is one type of atopic reaction, but it’s not the only one.

The same things that cause allergies — your body overreacting to environmental triggers — can trigger other atopic conditions. But they can also be triggered by nonallergic causes, like cold air and stress.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of atopy?

Symptoms of atopic conditions include:

Stuffy or runny nose.
Itchy or watery eyes.
Skin rashes or hives.
Itchy skin.
Shortness of breath (dyspnea).
Chronic cough.
Nausea and vomiting.
Mouth, throat, tongue or facial swelling.
What causes atopy?

Immunoglobulin E (IgE) causes the allergic conditions associated with atopy. IgE is a type of antibody that’s supposed to help protect your body from harmful pathogens (germs). But IgE antibodies sometimes mistake non-harmful allergens or other substances for harmful ones. This can cause airway swelling, rashes, a runny nose and other symptoms.

What are the risk factors for atopy?

The biggest risk factor for atopy is having other close family members — like a biological parent or sibling — who have atopic conditions. Experts think the tendency to have allergic conditions is inherited through your genes.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is atopy diagnosed?

Your healthcare provider may not directly diagnose atopy, but they can diagnose its related conditions. Depending on your symptoms, they might perform or order these tests:

Pulmonary function tests.
Allergy skin tests.
Allergy blood tests.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do I get rid of atopy?

You can’t cure the root cause of atopy. But treatments for atopic conditions, like allergies, asthma and eczema, include:

Allergy shots.
Antihistamines.
Biologics.
Inhalers.
Leukotriene modifiers.
Oral immunotherapy for food allergies.
Oral, inhaled or topical (applied to your skin) corticosteroids.
Sublingual immunotherapy.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
How can I prevent atopy?

Atopy can’t be prevented, but you can try to avoid triggers that cause atopic conditions. You can also take an antihistamine beforehand if you can’t avoid a trigger (like when you’ll be around a friend’s pet or during allergy season).

What are triggers of atopy?

Triggers for atopic reactions might include:

Pollen.
Cold, dry air.
Dust mites.
Specific foods, like peanuts, tree nuts or eggs.
Pet dander.
Molds.
Cockroaches.
Fragrances (like those used in soaps or laundry detergents).
Stress.

Living With
-----------
How do I take care of myself?

Most people with atopy can manage their conditions by avoiding triggers, taking preventive measures and treating reactions as soon as they start. Some ways to manage atopic conditions include:

Take short showers or baths every night. Make sure you use unscented bar soap and moisturize your skin afterwards with lotion or cream for sensitive skin.
Take allergy medication daily during times of the year when pollen counts for your allergens are high (usually spring, summer and/or fall).
Take any maintenance medication (like inhalers) as directed. Check with your provider to make sure you know how to properly use any medical devices.
Carry an epinephrine auto-injector (EpiPen®, Auvi-Q®) with you if you have a food allergy or another allergy that can cause anaphylaxis.
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to your healthcare provider if you have symptoms of atopic conditions like allergies, asthma or frequent skin rashes. They can help sort out what’s causing your symptoms and determine the best treatment. They may need to refer you to an allergist for the best care.

When should I go to the ER?

Go to an emergency room or call 911 if you have symptoms of a severe allergic reaction, including:

Swelling of your face, mouth, tongue or throat.
Severe vomiting.
Weakness, dizziness, light-headedness or passing out, which can be signs of low blood pressure.

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
If you or your child have atopy, you may feel like you’re constantly managing some condition or another. You might be overwhelmed with inhalers, allergy meds, bar soap, free-of-everything laundry detergent, lotions and creams. It might take some getting used to, especially if you’re caring for a child with many allergic conditions. But eventually, managing various atopic conditions becomes routine, like showering or brushing your teeth.

Talk to your provider about any concerns you have. They can help you sort through your options to prevent reactions and manage medications.
