Auditory Processing Disorder (APD)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/24938-auditory-processing-disorder

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of auditory processing disorder

Auditory processing disorder symptoms can vary. You might have difficulty:

Following verbal directions
Having long conversations or conversations in loud environments
Reading, spelling and writing
Responding immediately during conversations
Telling the difference between words
Understanding rapid speech
Auditory processing disorder causes

With auditory processing disorder, your brain has trouble interpreting what your ears hear. Many different things can cause it, including:

Central nervous system disorders like stroke, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis (MS) or Alzheimer’s disease
Frequent ear infections
Genetics
Head injuries
Low birth weight or premature birth
Neurodivergent conditions like ADHD or autism spectrum disorder
Complications of auditory processing disorder

If you have APD, you might have more trouble communicating compared to your peers. Over time, this may lead to mental health disorders like anxiety and depression. It’s important to tell your healthcare provider how you’re feeling so they can help.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose auditory processing disorder

Your healthcare provider will need to run some tests to diagnose auditory processing disorder. These tests might include:

Auditory processing tests to measure your brain’s ability to process sounds
Hearing tests to rule out hearing loss as the cause
Language tests to rule out language disorders
Psychological tests to check for ADHD or other similar conditions

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is auditory processing disorder treated?

Auditory processing disorder treatment may include:

Changing your environment, like sitting closer to the front of a classroom, for instance
Getting specialized speech and auditory therapy that focuses on building auditory skills
Using coping strategies, like using a recording device
When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you think you or your child might have APD, tell your healthcare provider. Many conditions share similar symptoms with APD. A diagnosis is key to getting the right treatment.

Who treats auditory processing disorder?

Several healthcare providers can help treat auditory processing disorder, including:

Audiologists
Otolaryngologists (ENTs)
Psychologists
Speech-language pathologists (SLPs)

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have auditory processing disorder?

APD affects each person differently. Self-care starts with understanding how APD impacts you.

For children and adults, APD treatment can help manage symptoms. Additionally, children with APD may notice an improvement in their symptoms as they grow older.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is auditory processing disorder a form of autism?

No, APD isn’t a form of autism spectrum disorder. But sometimes, the two conditions occur together. For instance, a child with autism might have communication challenges that could worsen APD symptoms.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
If you have APD, communicating with others can feel exhausting or embarrassing. Your brain works overtime to understand the words you hear — and that can use up a lot of mental energy. If this sounds familiar, talk to your healthcare provider. They can help you find ways to adjust and give you the tools you need for success.
