Oliguria (Low Urine Output)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22271-oliguria

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of oliguria

The primary symptom of oliguria is that you’re not peeing as much as you should be. Other symptoms depend on the underlying cause. They may include:

Abdominal pain
Cold hands and feet
Flank pain
Heart rate that’s faster than normal (tachycardia)
High acid levels in your blood (metabolic acidosis)
High potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia)
High waste levels in your blood (uremia)
Low blood pressure (hypotension)
Swelling (edema)
What causes oliguria?

Oliguria can be:

Pre-renal. This means something happens in your urinary system before the waste process gets to your kidneys.
Renal. There’s something affecting your kidneys. “Renal” means it relates to the kidneys.
Post-renal. Something happens later in the waste removal process, after your kidneys filter your blood.
Pre-renal causes

Pre-renal causes may include:

Heart and lung conditions
Low blood volume (hypovolemia), which can be caused by heavy blood loss, decreased fluid intake, burns, sepsis, liver failure and surgery
Vascular disease of your kidneys
Renal causes

Renal causes may include:

Kidney damage due to medications or toxins
Kidney disorders, including glomerulonephritis and acute tubular necrosis
Post-renal causes

Post-renal causes refer to blockages in your urinary system, such as a:

Bladder outlet obstruction
Ureteral stone

If you have a blockage, your kidneys still make pee, but the pee can’t leave your body.

Is oliguria dehydration?

Not always. But a low urine output can result from not drinking enough fluids (dehydration).

Risk factors

Low urine output can happen to anyone. But it’s more likely to happen if you have certain types of kidney diseases that can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI).

Low urine output is somewhat common among people who are on dialysis or who are already in the hospital. You may also be at a greater risk of developing oliguria if you’re 50 or older.

What happens if you don’t pee enough?

One of the most common complications in acute oliguria is that your kidneys suddenly can’t do a good job filtering toxins or wastes from your blood. This can lead to acute kidney failure. Potentially deadly complications of acute kidney failure include:

Electrolyte imbalances, including high levels of potassium (hyperkalemia) and acids (metabolic acidosis)
Neurological disorders, including overactive reflexes in your muscles (hyperreflexia), seizures and coma
Problems with the organs in your digestive system, including gastrointestinal bleeding and inflammation in your stomach lining (gastritis)
Problems with your heart and blood vessels, including an abnormal heartbeat (arrhythmia), congestive heart failure and high blood pressure
Problems with your lungs, including abnormal breathing patterns (Kussmaul breathing)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose oliguria

A healthcare provider will take a complete medical history and perform a physical exam. They may also recommend tests such as:

Blood tests
Imaging tests, including CT scans and an ultrasound of your kidney or urinary bladder
Urine tests (urinalysis), including tests to measure how much you pee and what components are in it

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you fix oliguria?

Oliguria treatment depends on the cause of low urine output:

If you can’t pee much because there’s a blockage, a healthcare provider will remove the blockage. This is true for blockages in your urinary system and blockages that happen when there’s a kink in a urinary catheter.
If you have an infection, you’ll get the correct antibiotics or antifungals.
If a medication has damaged your kidneys, a provider will stop that medication and replace it with another, if necessary.
If your urine output is low because vomiting or diarrhea causes dehydration, a provider will help you rehydrate by helping you drink fluids or intravenous (IV) fluids.
If you have kidney failure, you may need dialysis.
A provider may also recommend that you eat foods that provide the right amount of protein and calories for your condition.
Should I drink water if I can’t pee?

It depends on the cause. You should drink fluids if your urine output is low because you haven’t been taking in enough fluids. Plain water and rehydration solutions that contain electrolytes are good options. Some rehydration options include:

Clear broth
Diluted juices
Sports drinks
When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have issues with your heart or kidneys, make sure you follow any directions a healthcare provider makes regarding medications, fluid intake and food choices. If you notice you aren’t peeing as much as you usually do, try increasing your fluid intake and contact a provider. One sign of dehydration and reduced urine output is that the color of your pee turns a darker yellow.

You may wish to ask a provider questions such as:

What’s affecting my urine output?
Is it serious?
Do I have severe symptoms?
What treatment do you recommend?
Should I look out for any signs of complications?
Do I need to adjust what I eat and drink?
Should I see a dietitian?

Get help right away if you aren’t peeing as much as you think you should be and you have symptoms like:

Abdominal pain
Confusion
Feeling very tired (fatigue)
Fever

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have oliguria?

Your outlook depends on what’s affecting your urine output. But if you’re not peeing as much as you should be, that’s your body’s way of telling you that something is wrong, and you should reach out to a healthcare provider right away. Without treatment, serious complications can develop.

Prevention
----------
How can oliguria be prevented?

If you have diarrhea or are vomiting, make every effort to keep taking in fluids. It’s important to note low urine output as early as you can.

If you have problems breathing or issues with your kidneys or heart, follow a healthcare provider’s directions as far as how much you should drink each day and what you should eat.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Many people find it awkward to talk about peeing. But keeping track of how often and how much you pee is an important way to monitor your health. If you’ve been vomiting or have diarrhea, try to drink more water to prevent dehydration. If you’re drinking normally and aren’t peeing as much as you think you should, it’s time to call a healthcare provider for a diagnosis and treatment. They understand it can be a little uncomfortable for some to talk about their bathroom habits, so they’ll do their best to help you relax.
