Osteogenesis Imperfecta (Brittle Bone Disease)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/osteogenesis-imperfecta-brittle-bone-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease) can lead to multiple bone fractures. Some people have additional symptoms.

Symptoms of osteogenesis imperfecta

Signs and symptoms of this condition can include bone issues like:

Weak bones that break easily
Bone deformities
Bone pain
The white part of your eye looking blue or gray
Barrel-shaped rib cage
Curved spine (kyphosis or scoliosis)
Small stature
Triangular face shape
Weak, brittle or discolored teeth
Teeth that don’t align properly

You might also experience:

Bruising easily
Difficulty breathing
Hearing loss
Loose joints
Muscle weakness
Osteogenesis imperfecta causes

A genetic change causes this condition. Changes in the COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes cause most cases. Changes in other collagen genes cause rarer types of OI.

The genetic changes that cause OI can be random. You may also inherit them from your biological parents. You’re more likely to have OI if someone else in your biological family has it. Some people have the genetic variation but never develop osteogenesis imperfecta.

You can inherit the gene change from one parent (dominant) or both (recessive), depending on the type of OI.

Complications of brittle bone disease

Complications of osteogenesis imperfecta can include:

Heart disease, including heart failure
Frequent pneumonia
Respiratory issues, including respiratory failure
Nervous system issues

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose osteogenesis imperfecta

Healthcare providers usually diagnose brittle bone disease in childhood with:

Genetic testing
Bone density tests

A pregnancy care provider might suspect osteogenesis imperfecta before birth. They may see signs of OI on ultrasound images. They can confirm the diagnosis during pregnancy with an amniocentesis. They can also diagnose it after the baby is born.

Ask your provider about genetic counseling. This can help you understand your risk of passing osteogenesis imperfecta to your biological children.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is osteogenesis imperfecta treated?

Treatment for osteogenesis imperfecta can increase your bone strength. It can also help you live more independently. You might need:

Occupational therapy: Helps with everyday tasks
Physical therapy: Builds strength in bones and muscles
Assistive devices: Walkers, canes or crutches can improve mobility
Oral and dental care: Regular dental checkups and/or orthodontic care for tooth and jaw issues
Pulmonary care: Manages breathing issues
Medications: Bisphosphonates to strengthen bones
Surgery: Metal rods support curved or fragile bones
Braces, splints or casts: Stabilize bones after breaks or surgery
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to a healthcare provider if you think you or your child has symptoms of OI. Tell your provider if you break bones easily. Especially without a major injury. Your provider can recommend additional testing if needed.

Go to the emergency room if you or your child breaks a bone. Tell providers in the ER if you know you have osteogenesis imperfecta.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the life expectancy of a person with osteogenesis imperfecta?

Mild forms of osteogenesis imperfecta usually won’t affect your lifespan. But life expectancy varies depending on the type.

Prevention
----------
Can osteogenesis imperfecta be prevented?

Because brittle bone disease is a genetic condition, you can’t prevent it. If you or your partner has OI or if you have a relative with the condition, you can talk to a genetic counselor. They can advise you about the risks of passing on the condition.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Learning that your child has a condition that’ll affect them for their whole life can feel overwhelming. The future might look much different from what you expected. But early occupational and physical therapy can help both you and your child adapt to these changes.

It can also help to have honest conversations with your child’s healthcare team and your loved ones every step of the way. They can help you make a plan to manage symptoms and prepare for the future.
