Glioma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21969-glioma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of a glioma

A glioma can cause different symptoms depending on where it forms. Some of the most common glioma symptoms include:

Changes in your vision or sudden vision loss
Difficulty walking or keeping your balance
Dizziness
Headaches
Nausea and vomiting
New depression or anxiety
Personality changes or sudden mood swings
Seizures
Trouble speaking or communicating (aphasia)
Trouble thinking, learning or remembering (cognitive problems)
Weakness or numbness on one side of your body (hemiparesis)
Glioma causes

Genetic changes in glial cells cause gliomas. Providers don’t always know why these changes occur.

While you can’t prevent gliomas, staying informed and seeking care early if you notice symptoms may improve outcomes.

Risk factors

Anyone can develop a glioma. But some factors may increase your risk, including your:

Age: Gliomas are most common in adults after age 65 and in children before age 12.
Family history: Some genetic disorders that you can inherit from your biological family may increase your risk.
Race: People who are white may be more likely to develop gliomas than other races.
Radiation or toxin exposure: Repeated exposure to radiation or certain chemicals may increase your risk.

If brain or spinal cord tumors run in your biological family, you may want to consider genetic testing for cancer risk. Talk to a healthcare provider about genetic counseling.

But you don’t need to worry because most gliomas aren’t linked to clear risk factors.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose a glioma

A healthcare provider will diagnose a glioma by reviewing your medical history and running tests. They’ll give you a physical and a neurological exam.

You’ll need imaging tests like an MRI or a CT scan. These tests will show the tumor in your brain or spinal cord. If your provider sees signs of a tumor on imaging tests, they’ll do a biopsy. This will tell them which type of tumor it is and its grade.

Molecular testing on biopsy tissue is a standard to make a glioma diagnosis.

You may see a neuro-oncologist, a specialist in brain and spinal cord cancers, to manage this condition.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is a glioma treated?

The best treatments for you will depend on a few factors, like:

The glioma’s type, size and location
Your age
Your overall health
If you’ve had brain or spinal cord cancer treatment in the past

You’ll need a combination of:

Surgery
Radiation therapy
Chemotherapy
Surgery

Surgery is often the first treatment for gliomas, when the tumor is accessible. A surgeon may be able to remove all of the tumor. But gliomas can be hard to remove completely because they may form in hard-to-reach areas.

A craniotomy (open brain surgery) is the most common type of removal brain surgery. If the glioma is in your spinal cord, you may need stereotactic radiosurgery or another type of spinal surgery.

Depending on the size and location of the tumor, you may be a candidate for laser ablation. This minimally invasive surgery uses heat from a laser to destroy all or part of the tumor.

Radiation and chemotherapy

You’ll probably need radiation therapy and chemotherapy (chemo) after surgery. These treatments destroy any remaining cancer cells or parts of the tumor your surgeon couldn’t safely remove.

Radiation kills cancer cells. You may get radiation from an external beam machine. It uses high-powered X-rays to target cancer.

Chemo is a group of medications your providers will give you that stop cancer cells from growing and multiplying.

Your providers might use radiation and chemo as your main treatments if it’s not safe to surgically remove the glioma.

What are the side effects of glioma treatment?

Almost everyone has side effects from cancer treatments. Some treatments cause side effects that last for years. Ask your providers about palliative care that can help you manage glioma symptoms and treatment side effects. The most common treatment side effects are:

Anemia
Cancer fatigue
Cognitive changes
Hair loss (from radiation)
Nausea and vomiting
Pain
Risk of infection (from chemo)
When should I see my healthcare provider?

You’ll need to visit your healthcare providers for follow-up visits to monitor for any changes. Your provider will order regular imaging scans to see if the cancer spreads or comes back (recurs).

You might need physical therapy to strengthen your body during and after treatment. Your providers may suggest occupational therapy to help you adjust to changes in your body.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
Glioma survival rate

Survival rates for gliomas vary. It depends on the tumor type, grade and your age. Usually, the younger you are when you’re diagnosed and treated, the better the outlook.

The five-year survival rate is how many people with a type of cancer are alive five years after diagnosis.

Glioblastoma has the lowest five-year survival rate compared to other gliomas. Low-grade ependymomas, oligodendrogliomas and astrocytomas tend to have the highest five-year survival rate.

Your healthcare providers will tell you what to expect. Your case may or may not match statistics.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Living with cancer can be stressful and scary. It affects your body and your mind. Be honest with your care team about how you feel. They can help you adjust to changes in your health and daily life.

Support groups can help you and your loved ones cope with the challenges of a spinal cord or brain tumor. Your care team can connect you to local or online resources.

A glioma diagnosis brings changes, but you can still take steps forward. Work with your care team and focus on what helps you feel informed and cared for.
