Golfer’s Elbow (Medial Epicondylitis)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21711-golfers-elbow-medial-epicondylitis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of golfer’s elbow

Golfer’s elbow symptoms can take weeks or months to develop. They might start with pain in your inner elbow that seems worse first thing in the morning. Other symptoms include:

Aching pain in your forearm or wrist
Decreased grip strength
Numbness in your hand
Pain when you try to make a fist
Radiating pain up and down your arm
Tingling in your hand

Golfer’s elbow (medial epicondylitis) usually affects your dominant arm. For example, right-handed people develop golfer’s elbow in their right arm.

Golfer’s elbow causes

Golfer’s elbow (medial epicondylitis) happens when you repeatedly use your wrist and arm to bend, grasp or twist things. Over time, the tendons that connect your forearm and elbow develop strains that lead to tiny tears, which can cause elbow, forearm and wrist pain.

Risk factors for medial epicondylitis

Your risk of developing golfer’s elbow increases if you:

Have diabetes
Have obesity
Smoke
Spend two or more hours a day doing repetitive actions

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How do doctors diagnose golfer’s elbow?

Your healthcare provider will ask what activities make your elbow hurt. They’ll examine your arm for specific movements and/or positions that cause pain. Other tests might include:

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Ultrasound
Computed tomography (CT) scans

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What’s the treatment for golfer’s elbow?

First, give your arm a break. Healthcare providers recommend you rest your arm for at least four to six weeks before playing sports or resuming the daily activities that put a strain on your arm.

Other golfer’s elbow treatments include:

Using ice on your forearm
Taking anti-inflammatory medications
Wearing a brace on your forearm
Wearing a night splint
Using kinesiology tape
Going to physical therapy

Persistent golfer’s elbow (medial epicondylitis) pain that’s not significantly reduced by physical therapy might require additional treatment, including:

Massage to stimulate nerve endings and pressure points to promote healing and reduce pain
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy to stimulate blood flow and encourage healing by delivering high-energy sound waves
Topical nitroglycerin patches to reduce inflammation
Corticosteroid injections for short-term symptom relief
Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) injections to reduce pain and improve function
Prolotherapy to jump-start your body’s healing process
Botulinum toxin (Botox®) injections to block nerve signals and reduce pain
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous tenotomy to repair damage to your tendons
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) to relieve pain

If you haven’t had any improvement of your symptoms with these methods over six to 12 months, your provider may recommend surgery, but this is rare.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Contact your provider if you still have symptoms even after resting your arm and doing physical therapy.

Golfer’s elbow doesn’t usually require an emergency room visit. But your symptoms might be signs of a serious problem. Go to the emergency room or get immediate attention if:

Your elbow looks misshapen
Your elbow feels hot or inflamed, and you have a fever
You think you’ve broken a bone
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

Some questions you may want to ask your provider include:

I don’t play golf. How did I develop golfer’s elbow?
What can I do about the pain?
Are there exercises I can do?
Will I need surgery?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Fortunately, most people recover from golfer’s elbow without surgery. There are also simple steps you can take every day that can help your tendons heal. But left untreated, golfer’s elbow could cause long-term problems like limiting your elbow’s range of motion, causing chronic pain and weakening your grip.

How do I take care of myself?

Start by giving your aching arm some R&R. Here are other steps you can take once you’re back in the swing of things — whether that’s sports or work:

Talk to your healthcare provider about appropriate stretches or strengthening exercises that you can do before you participate in activities that strain your wrist and arm.
Wear a brace while you work or play sports.
Ice your arm after work or playing sports.

Prevention
----------
How can I prevent golfer’s elbow?

There are several ways you can prevent medial epicondylitis:

Pay special attention to your wrist and forearm during sports warmups
Adjust your sports equipment and/or technique
Wear a brace on the job to help give your wrist additional support
Build in breaks when you can to do gentle stretches or simply rest your arm
Perform appropriate shoulder strengthening exercises guided by a physical therapist

Living With
-----------
How do I take care of myself?

Start by giving your aching arm some R&R. Here are other steps you can take once you’re back in the swing of things — whether that’s sports or work:

Talk to your healthcare provider about stretches for your wrist and arm that you can do before you participate in activities that strain your wrist and arm.
Wear a brace while you work or play sports.
Ice your arm after work or playing sports.
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Contact your provider if you still have symptoms even after resting your arm and doing physical therapy.

When should I go to the emergency room or seek immediate medical attention?

Golfer’s elbow doesn't usually require an emergency room visit. But your symptoms might be signs of a serious problem. Go to the emergency room or get immediate attention if:

Your elbow looks misshapen.
Your elbow feels hot or inflamed, and you have a fever.
You think you've broken a bone.
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

Here are some questions you might ask:

I don't play golf. How did I develop golfer’s elbow?
What is the treatment for golfer’s elbow?
What can I do about the pain?
Will I need surgery?
How long do I need to rest my arm?
Are there exercises I can do?

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Golfer’s elbow can be more than a nuisance that keeps you off the greens, away from the courts or off the job. Left untreated, golfer’s elbow could cause permanent damage like limiting your elbow's range of motion, causing chronic pain and weakening your grip. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have persistent elbow pain. They’ll treat the pain and recommend ways you can take care of your elbow without giving up your favorite activities.
