Growth Spurt
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22070-growth-spurts

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Growth spurt symptoms

Changes in your child’s height and weight are the most immediate signs that they’re experiencing a growth spurt. Other signs of a growth spurt may include:

Increase or decrease in hunger
Fussiness or emotional outbursts
Changes in sleep habits
Baby teeth appearing and adult (permanent) teeth replacing baby teeth
Sexual development (menstruation, voice change, pubic and armpit hair growth)
What does a growth spurt feel like?

Growth spurts don’t feel like anything. You may notice eating or sleeping changes that make your baby fussier than normal. But that isn’t a sign of pain. Growth spurts don’t cause arm and leg pains like growing pains do. Any uneasiness during your child’s growth spurts is temporary.

Growth spurt causes

Genetics play a key role in growth spurts. Your child’s genes will determine how tall they’ll grow. Genes will also be a factor in how quickly your child will reach their greatest height.

In addition to their genetic makeup, environmental factors can affect your child’s growth. These can include:

Pregnancy complications
What they eat and their access to healthy food options
Exposure to harmful substances in the water or atmosphere
The amount of sleep they get
How much exercise they get

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
The average height and weight of females and males from their first year to 18 years old.

How doctors diagnose a growth spurt

Your child’s healthcare provider will track your baby’s height and weight during their well checkups. They’ll use a scale, measuring tape or measuring table (stadiometer). Growth charts identify whether your child is growing on target according to their peers of the same age.

Since a growth spurt doesn’t cause any health problems, there’s no need to rush to the pediatrician’s office. Instead, your child’s provider will track changes in your child’s height and weight at their next checkup. They’ll let you know if they’re following the typical pattern of growth for their age.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do I support my child during their growth spurt?

Babies younger than a year old express their growth spurts through fussiness and periods of increased hunger. For school-age children and adolescents, growth spurts trigger changes in appetite, sleep and behavior. During your child’s growth spurt, you can support them by:

Providing extra meals to satisfy their appetite
Encouraging regular bedtime and positive sleeping habits
Being patient with their changing emotions
When should my child see their healthcare provider?

Contact your child’s provider if all the following describe your baby:

They become fussy or express discomfort
Their symptoms are difficult to ease
Their symptoms last more than a week
They’re not showing any signs of illness
What questions should I ask my child’s healthcare provider?

Questions you may want to ask your child’s provider include:

If my child complains of pain in their arms and legs, does that relate to a growth spurt?
Is my child meeting growth expectations for their age?
If my child doesn’t reach their growth milestones at the same time as their peers, is it a sign of a developmental delay?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
How long do growth spurts last?

Growth spurts don’t last long. In babies, they tend to be shorter — they may last up to three days. Growth spurts in adolescents may occur multiple times over a couple of years.

Prevention
----------
Are growth spurts preventable?

No, and you don’t want to prevent them. They’re a natural part of the growth process. Your child will experience growth spurts at their own pace. They’ll happen when their body says it’s time to increase their height and weight.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Growth spurts happen in the blink of an eye and often spark the statement, “Look how big you’ve gotten!” at gatherings with your family and friends. Children grow at their own pace. Each child will develop when their body and genes tell them it’s time. If you notice your child isn’t meeting height or weight expectations for their age, talk with their healthcare provider.
