Guinea Worm Disease (Dracunculiasis)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/guinea-worm-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of guinea worm disease

You don’t have any symptoms of guinea worm disease when you’re first infected. About a year after infection, the worm starts to exit your skin. This causes pain, swelling and blistering where the worm emerges. You might also experience:

Fever
Eye swelling
Itching
Joint pain
Nausea
Vomiting
Wheezing

The symptoms can be so debilitating that you might need to stay in bed for the weeks that it takes for the worm to emerge.

Guinea worm disease causes

Dracunculus medinensis (D. medinensis), a type of parasitic worm, causes guinea worm disease. The larvae live in stagnant (nonmoving) water, like ponds or shallow wells. They infect copepods, bug-like crustaceans that are almost too tiny to see. Copepods are sometimes called water fleas.

If you drink water that copepods live in, D. medinensis larvae can get into your stomach and intestines. They move through the walls of your insides to other parts of your body. Eventually (usually about a year later), an adult worm starts pushing its way through your skin. They need to get to the outside of your body to release eggs into water. Adults can grow up to 3 feet (1 meter), so it can take a long time for them to work their way out of your body.

Complications

Complications of guinea worm disease happen when the worm grows to adult size and exits your body. The open wound that the worm comes through can get infected with bacteria. Inflammation in your joints can permanently damage them.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose guinea worm disease

Healthcare providers diagnose guinea worm disease by seeing the worm emerging. There aren’t tests that diagnose it before then.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

There are no medications that treat guinea worm disease. Providers can slowly and carefully pull the worm out of your skin with a stick. They can only pull a little bit out each day. But it might help get the worm out faster than it would move on its own. Sometimes, a provider surgically removes the worm.

A provider might prescribe steroids and pain medication to help ease your symptoms. You’ll need antibiotic treatment if you get a bacterial infection.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you think you have guinea worm disease, especially if you have a worm emerging from your body, see a healthcare provider. They can help reduce the risk of spreading D. medinensis eggs, keep an eye out for additional infections and help ease your symptoms.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What happens if you have guinea worm disease?

Guinea worm disease usually isn’t fatal, but it can be painful and prevent you from going about your life. It can take several weeks for the worm to completely exit your body. During this time, you might not be able to move around much. You might need someone to care for you.

Even after the worm is out, you might have lingering swelling or an infection that can take a few weeks or months to completely resolve.

Prevention
----------
Can guinea worm disease be prevented?

Public health agencies are working to eradicate guinea worm disease. This means creating access to clean water supplies and getting medical treatment for people with an infection.

You can protect yourself by drinking water only from safe sources. Drink bottled water if you’re not sure.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Guinea worm disease can be debilitating. It mostly affects areas without access to clean drinking water. If you live in or are traveling to an area where you’re not sure if the water is safe, it’s best to drink bottled water. Thanks to public health efforts, infections are becoming less common. But health officials are still working to eradicate it completely, to keep everyone safe.
