Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) in Kids
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/12415-urinary-tract-infection-childrens

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of UTIs in kids

Symptoms of a UTI in infants, babies and toddlers include:

Fever
Belly pain or fullness
Strong, foul-smelling pee
Weight loss
Irritability
Vomiting
Poor feeding
Fatigue
Yellowish skin or eyes
Diarrhea

Symptoms of a UTI in older kids include:

A frequent, urgent need to pee, especially if only a small amount comes out when they go
Daytime accidents or bedwetting after being fully potty trained
Painful or difficult urination
Pain or discomfort in their lower belly, back or side
Pee that smells bad, is cloudy or has blood in it
Nausea and/or vomiting
Fever and chills
Fatigue

Symptoms of a UTI are the same in both boys and girls.

Causes of urinary tract infections in kids

Bacteria cause most UTIs in kids. E. coli bacteria are the most common cause. They live in your digestive tract and can get into your urinary tract through your poop. This can happen if you don’t wipe properly after pooping. Sometimes, fungal infections can cause UTIs in kids, too, but they’re less common.

Risk factors

Your child might be at higher risk for a UTI if they:

Have vesicoureteral reflux, a condition where your pee flows backwards from your bladder towards your kidneys
Are constipated, which can block pee from flowing normally
Have differences in their urinary tract (like posterior urethral valves or ureteroceles)
Hold their pee when they need to go to the bathroom

Female children are more likely than males to get UTIs because their urethras (the tube that carries pee out of their bodies) are shorter and closer to their anuses (where poop leaves their bodies). This means it’s easier for bacteria to get into the urinary tract and cause an infection.

Can boys get UTIs?

Boys are less likely to get UTIs than girls, but they can get them, too, especially if they have anatomical differences that cause pee to back up. Uncircumcised boys are at a slightly higher risk for UTIs than circumcised boys.

Complications of UTIs in kids

If left untreated, UTIs can lead to:

Sepsis, a serious reaction to an infection that can cause organ failure
Growth faltering, or not growing as expected
Kidney infection
Kidney (renal) scarring, which can lead to chronic kidney failure and other health conditions

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose UTIs in kids

A healthcare provider can diagnose a UTI by asking about your child’s symptoms and getting a sample of their pee for a urinalysis or urine culture. They may also get blood tests to look for infections and test kidney function. In some cases, they’ll use imaging (like ultrasound or CT scans) to look at your child’s kidneys or bladder.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How are UTIs in kids treated?

Antibiotics treat UTIs in kids. A provider will give them to your child through an IV (through a vein in their arm) or your child will take them by mouth (as a pill or liquid).

Recovery time

Your child will need to be on antibiotics for a week or two, in most cases. But they should start to feel better within a couple of days. Make sure they take the entire course of medication as prescribed, even if they feel better.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Contact your child’s healthcare provider if you think your child has a UTI, or if they’ve been taking antibiotics as prescribed for three days and aren’t getting better. Take your child to the emergency room if they:

Have symptoms of a UTI and are under 6 months old
Have a fever and symptoms of a UTI
Aren’t eating or drinking or can’t keep any food or liquids down
Haven’t had a wet diaper in six hours
Have yellowish skin or eyes
Have severe pain
Have bloody pee

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if my child has a UTI?

Your child should start to feel better after a day or two on antibiotics. Make sure they get plenty of rest and stay hydrated by drinking enough fluids. Contact your provider if they don’t feel better after three days of treatment.

Your child may need additional tests if they have frequent UTIs or infections that keep coming back.

Can a child’s UTI go away on its own?

If your child has a UTI, they need to see a healthcare provider and get antibiotic treatment. Left untreated, UTIs can lead to kidney infections and other health issues.

Prevention
----------
Can I prevent my child from getting UTIs?

You can reduce your child’s risk of getting a UTI by:

Changing wet diapers frequently and dirty diapers as soon as possible
Wiping front to back and teaching your child to wipe that way, too (for instance, if your child has a vagina, that means wiping away from the vulva toward the butt)
Encouraging your child to go to the bathroom when they need to and not “hold it” if they’re potty trained
Having them wear cotton underwear
Making sure they drink plenty of water
Using gentle soap in the tub — even though bubble baths don’t cause UTIs, scented soap can irritate your child’s urethra and make infections more likely
Making sure they poop regularly — talk with your provider if your child has frequent constipation

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
UTIs are fairly common in kids. And most of the time, a healthcare provider can easily treat them. If your child isn’t acting like themselves or you notice anything unusual about their bathroom habits, it’s a good idea to check with your family doctor or pediatrician. Quick treatment can prevent serious complications.
