Estrogen-Dependent Cancers
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/10312-estrogen-dependent-cancers

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
Estrogen-dependent cancers use the female estrogen hormone to grow and possibly spread. Estrogen doesn’t cause cancer. But it can make some cancerous cells grow more quickly. This happens when estrogen attaches to proteins (receptors) in cancerous cells.

Breast, ovarian and uterine (endometrial) cancers are examples of estrogen-dependent cancers. Oncologists treat these cancers with hormone therapy that keeps estrogen away from cancerous cells.

Breast cancer is the most common example. Estrogen plays a role in several types, including:

ER-positive (ER+) breast cancer
HR positive (HR+) breast cancer
Luminal A breast cancer
Luminal B breast cancer
Triple positive breast cancer

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What causes estrogen-dependent cancer?

This type of cancer happens when estrogen attaches to cancerous cells in certain parts of your body. Some cells in your body have proteins (hormone receptors). Estrogen in your bloodstream can attach to the proteins. In healthy cells, estrogen that attaches to proteins helps those cells work and grow. In estrogen-dependent cancer, the hormone makes cancerous cells divide and multiply.

Risk factors

Long-term exposure to the hormone increases your risk. Long-term exposure may happen if you:

Start your period before age 12
Go into menopause after 55
Take hormone replacement therapy for menopause symptoms
Take estrogen-only hormonal replacement therapy for a long time, which can increase the risk that ovarian cancer will be estrogen-dependent
Have estrogen dominance (hormone imbalance)

Other risk factors include:

Having obesity
Having polycystic disease

Rarely, taking the cancer drug tamoxifen for breast cancer may increase your risk of estrogen-dependent uterine cancer. Tamoxifen lowers breast cancer risk and treats hormone-positive breast cancer that comes back. But if you’re going through menopause, the drug acts like estrogen and helps uterine cancer grow.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Your healthcare provider or oncologist will do a biopsy to get tissue samples. A lab checks the samples for hormone receptors. A hormone receptor-positive (HR+) result means estrogen, progesterone or both hormones are helping cancer to grow.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Treatment

Hormone therapy for cancer is a common treatment for estrogen-dependent cancer. It works by:

Blocking cancerous cells’ access to estrogen
Keeping your body from producing estrogen
Replacing estrogen with lab-made estrogen (hormone) that cancer can’t use to grow

Your oncologist may use hormone therapy with other treatments, like surgery, chemotherapy or radiation therapy.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Can I reduce my risk by avoiding phytoestrogens?

Researchers are unsure if phytoestrogen affects your risk of estrogen-dependent cancers Phytoestrogens are plant-based foods that act like estrogen. Dairy milk, whole wheat and soy are examples. Research shows that getting estrogen from food may be useful if you have low estrogen levels. It may be a different story if you don’t need extra estrogen.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Estrogen is an essential female hormone. It supports your reproductive system and helps your body work in different ways. But this essential hormone can become the engine that fuels certain types of cancers. If you have breast cancer, endometrial cancer or ovarian cancer, your oncologist may do tests to see if estrogen is making cancer grow more quickly. That way, they can recommend the treatment that’s right for you.
