Renal Oncocytoma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22209-renal-oncocytoma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of renal oncocytoma?

Most people don’t have symptoms of renal oncocytoma. If you do have symptoms, they might include:

Blood in your pee
Flank pain
A lump you can feel on the side of your affected kidney
Renal oncocytoma causes

Experts aren’t sure what causes renal oncocytomas. Genetics (your DNA) probably plays a role, as some people born with hereditary conditions are more likely to get them.

What are the risk factors for renal oncocytoma?

Certain conditions that run in families make it more likely for you to develop oncocytomas. For instance, tuberous sclerosis complex and Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome both cause growths on your skin and other organs.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is renal oncocytoma diagnosed?

Healthcare providers use imaging and biopsies to diagnose renal oncocytoma. They may also do blood tests to check your kidney function.

You may have already had a growth show up on an ultrasound, CT scan or MRI. To determine whether the growth is an oncocytoma or another, more serious type of tumor (like renal cell carcinoma), your provider might recommend a biopsy of the growth. A pathologist will then look at the tissue to make a diagnosis.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Should renal oncocytoma be removed?

Your healthcare provider may recommend surgery to make an accurate diagnosis or to relieve symptoms. But renal oncocytomas that don’t grow or cause symptoms don’t necessarily need treatment.

If you need to have an oncocytoma removed, recommended procedures could include:

Removing only the tumor (partial nephrectomy)
Removing your entire kidney (radical nephrectomy)
Freezing the tumor to destroy it (cryoablation)
Destroying the tumor with heat (radiofrequency ablation)
When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have a renal oncocytoma, talk to your provider if you start experiencing symptoms. It might also be helpful to understand whether you need follow-up imaging, and how often.

You may want to ask your healthcare provider:

Do I need any additional tests?
What are my treatment options?
Could this spread or become cancerous?
What symptoms should I look out for?
Should I get imaging periodically? How often?
When should I follow up with you?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have renal oncocytoma?

Most of the time, oncocytomas don’t cause issues. Your provider may recommend scans periodically to make sure the growth isn’t changing quickly or spreading. If it starts to cause symptoms or grow quickly, your provider may recommend surgery to remove it.

Renal oncocytomas typically don’t come back (recur) if a provider removes them. But if you have a genetic condition that causes growths, you might develop multiple tumors or tumors in both kidneys that recur. Your provider can tell you what to expect in your specific situation.

Can oncocytoma spread (metastasize)?

It’s extremely rare for renal oncocytomas to become cancerous or spread to other organs. Oncocytomas with atypical (unusual) features might be more likely to spread than others. Providers can identify these features if you have the tumor biopsied or removed.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
How common are renal oncocytomas?

About 3% to 7% of all kidney tumors are renal oncocytomas, making them fairly rare.

What is cystic oncocytoma?

A cystic oncocytoma is a type of tumor that contains areas of fluid, rather than a growth of solid tissue. They’re an uncommon form of oncocytoma.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
One of the risks of medical imaging is that sometimes, providers discover things that would never cause you physical harm. But finding out you have a tumor can cause a lot of stress and worry. It’s normal to want to know if there’s a risk that it’ll spread and whether you’ll need surgery.

Fortunately, oncocytomas are considered noncancerous. It’s extremely rare for them to spread. Don’t hesitate to ask your providers about any concerns you have about monitoring or treatment options.
