Diamond-Blackfan Anemia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/14476-diamond-blackfan-anemia

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Diamond-Blackfan anemia?

Diamond-Blackfan anemia symptoms range from mild to severe and may include:

Fatigue
Headache
Loss of appetite
Rapid heartbeat (tachycardia)
Shortness of breath
Skin paleness (pallor)
Swelling in your hands and feet
Weakness
Diamond-Blackfan anemia causes

Diamond-Blackfan anemia happens when there’s a change in your ribosomal protein genes. Your ribosomal protein genes make red blood cells. The changes cause a decrease in red blood cell production, leading to anemia.

Between 10% to 25% of people with DBA inherit it from their biological parents. Most cases occur in people with no family history of the condition.

Complications of this condition

Possible complications of Diamond-Blackfan anemia include:

Birth defects: Issues with the heart, kidneys, or limbs
Growth faltering: Slower-than-expected growth
Iron overload: From repeated blood transfusions
Neutropenia: Low levels of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell
Pancytopenia: Low levels of all blood cells
Thrombocytopenia: Low platelet count

If you have DBA, you have a slightly increased risk of developing these conditions:

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)
Osteosarcoma
Other tumors

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Healthcare providers may use several tests to diagnose this condition:

Complete blood count (CBC): This test measures hemoglobin, red and white blood cells, and platelets.
Reticulocyte count: This checks immature red blood cells. A low count suggests bone marrow problems.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy: This collects bone marrow samples to look for low red blood cell production.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is Diamond-Blackfan anemia treated?

Treatments for DB anemia, from most to least common, include:

Corticosteroids. These medications help your bone marrow make more red blood cells.
Blood transfusion. This treatment uses donated red blood cells to boost your levels. Healthcare providers usually start blood transfusions immediately after diagnosis.
Stem cell transplant from family members or an unrelated donor. This is the only known cure for Diamond-Blackfan anemia. But it can potentially cause several life-threatening complications. Healthcare providers consider this option on a case-by-case basis.
How soon after treatment will I feel better?

Steroids typically help within two to four weeks. Blood transfusions usually bring fast relief.

Everyone’s different, so ask your provider what to expect in your case.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What’s the outlook for Diamond-Blackfan anemia?

With treatment, the outlook is good, but it requires lifelong care and monitoring. Your risk of serious complications increases around age 25.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia life expectancy

How long someone lives with DBA depends on their symptoms and treatment. Research shows that about 75% of people with DBA are alive at age 50. But because it’s rare, data is limited. Your provider can offer more personalized information.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have Diamond-Blackfan anemia, you’ll need to stay in close communication with your healthcare provider. See them for routine check-ups.

You should also tell your provider if your symptoms get worse. For instance, if you’re suddenly more tired all the time or have had several recent infections, let them know.

Call 911 or head to your nearest emergency room if you develop:

Chest pain
Severe belly pain
Sudden headache or confusion (stroke signs)
Uncontrolled bleeding

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Living with a lifelong illness like Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is hard, especially when it affects your child. It can be even tougher when most people have never heard of it. You might feel alone, but you’re not. Your provider can connect you with resources, support and a care plan tailored to your needs.
