Heart Disease
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/24129-heart-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of heart disease

The first symptoms of heart disease include chest pain, shortness of breath, swelling in your legs, fatigue and dizziness/fainting. But you can have different signs of heart disease depending on what’s wrong. Heart disease symptoms may include:

Pounding or racing heart (palpitations)
Sweating
Neck pain
Heartburn or indigestion
Nausea or vomiting
Trouble sleeping
Exercise intolerance
Fever
Heart disease causes

Issues with your heart, like muscle scarring or injury or blocked arteries can cause heart disease. Different types of heart disease have different causes. Other causes of heart disease include:

Genetic issues
Kidney problems
Infections, including those outside your heart
Thyroid problems
Autoimmune diseases
Pregnancy complications
Aging
Certain medications, like chemotherapy
Use of addictive substances
High blood pressure
Risk factors

Heart disease may be more likely to happen to you if you have certain risk factors. Risk factors for heart disease include conditions like high cholesterol, high blood pressure, Type 2 diabetes or substance use disorder. You’re also in a high-risk group if you have a BMI (body mass index) higher than 25 (having overweight). Having heart disease in your biological family raises your risk, and so does using tobacco products, being inactive and eating unhealthy foods.

You can lower your risk by managing these conditions, being more physically active, giving up tobacco and eating healthier.

Complications of this condition

Some types of heart disease can lead to other kinds of heart disease. Complications of heart disease — many of which are life-threatening — include:

Heart attack
Heart failure
Cardiomyopathy
Stroke
Abnormal heart rhythms
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiac arrest
Heart valve disease
Pulmonary hypertension
Damage to your kidneys or liver

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

A provider can make a heart disease diagnosis after doing a physical exam, hearing about your symptoms and learning about your personal and biological family health history. They’ll also perform diagnostic tests, like:

Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG)
Ambulatory monitors
Echocardiogram
Cardiac computerized tomography (CT)
Heart magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Blood tests to check your cholesterol level and other substances
Stress test
Cardiac catheterization

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is heart disease treated?

Heart disease treatments depend on your heart issue. Your healthcare provider may ask you to make changes to your daily life, take medication or have surgery.

Heart disease treatments may include:

Lifestyle changes: This could consist of cutting saturated fats from your meals, stopping the use of tobacco products or starting a walking program.
Medicine: You can lower blood pressure and cholesterol with medicine. Also, certain medications can help with heart failure or abnormal heart rhythms. Always take these prescriptions the way your provider tells you to.
Surgeries or procedures: You may need open-heart surgery, minimally invasive surgery or an ablation. Other procedures include catheterization, device placement or cardioversion.
Cardiac rehab: This supervised program can strengthen your heart after a heart attack. With nutritional advice and monitored exercise, it provides extra support for changing your lifestyle.
Recovery time

Depending on the surgery or procedure you have, your recovery can take a few days to many weeks. You may only need a few days to recover from minor procedures. But you may need two to four weeks to recover from minimally invasive surgery and six to 12 weeks to recover from open-heart surgery.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have a biological family history of heart disease, you may want to ask your provider if you have other risk factors. If you do, you can make a plan to help prevent heart disease.

Contact your provider if you have heart disease symptoms. Call your local emergency number if you suddenly experience chest pain, pressure, heaviness or discomfort, fainting or shortness of breath.

You may want to ask your healthcare provider:

What kind of heart disease do I have?
Is my family at risk for this type of disease?
What’s the best treatment for me?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have heart disease?

Medications and/or procedures can help people who have various types of heart diseases. It’s easier to treat most types of heart disease if you get an early diagnosis instead of waiting for symptoms to get worse. Many people can live full lives when they follow their healthcare provider’s treatment plan.

Is there anything I can do to feel better?

If you have coronary artery disease (the most common kind of heart disease), you can improve your health by making changes to your daily life. This may include reducing how much salt and saturated fat you eat and increasing how active you are. A provider may also recommend taking medicine to lower your cholesterol and blood pressure.

Prevention
----------
Can heart disease be prevented?

You can prevent some kinds of heart diseases in these ways:

Reach and stay at a weight that’s healthy for you.
Manage conditions like diabetes, high blood pressure and high cholesterol.
Get at least 30 to 60 minutes of exercise per day on most days.
Decrease your stress level.
Sleep seven to nine hours every night.
Eat foods that are unprocessed and low in salt and saturated fat.
Don’t use any tobacco products.
Limit how many beverages you drink that contain alcohol.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Your heart has a crucial job, so it’s important to pay attention to warning signs of a heart issue. Many heart diseases develop over time. Identifying heart disease early gives you the best chance of managing it well. Talk with a healthcare provider about the best ways to prevent heart disease or keep it from getting worse. Even if you have risk factors you can’t change, there are other things you have the power to change.
