Heel Bursitis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21706-heel-bursitis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of heel bursitis

Heel bursitis symptoms may include:

Pain and swelling in or behind your heel
Tenderness
Increased pain when standing on your toes
Warmth around your heel and the surrounding area
Change in skin color around your heel
Heel bursitis causes

Heel bursitis has many causes, including:

Standing, walking, running or jumping a lot
Quickly increasing the intensity of your activities or workouts
Not properly stretching
Tight-fitting shoes
Bacterial infection
Risk factors for heel bursitis

Heel bursitis most frequently affects people who overuse their ankles without proper conditioning. A sudden increase in walking, running or jumping can cause heel bursitis.

It’s important to wear proper footwear, especially when practicing a sport or exercising. Tight-fitting shoes can cause heel bursitis.

Heel bursitis can also affect those who have other disorders, including:

Haglund’s deformity
Rheumatoid arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS)
Psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter’s syndrome)
Pseudogout
Gout

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose heel bursitis

Before examining your foot, your healthcare provider may ask several questions, including:

Do you stand a lot?
What do you do for physical activity?
What types of shoes do you wear?
Have you had heel bursitis before?

Your provider will examine your foot. They’ll:

Check for swelling
Note any tender or painful areas
Check your foot’s range of motion
Ask you to stand on your toes or flex your feet

If your provider suspects that you have a bacterial infection, they may:

Ask if you have chills
Check your temperature
Remove some fluid from the heel bursa with a syringe (bursal aspiration)
Test the fluid for the presence of bacteria
What tests will be done to diagnose heel bursitis?

Imaging tests can help your healthcare provider confirm heel bursitis. These tests may include:

X-rays. An X-ray will show a detailed image of your heel bone. Your healthcare provider will examine the X-ray for any abnormalities in your heel bone.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). An MRI can determine if the cause of your heel pain is from something other than heel bursitis, like Achilles tendinitis.
Ultrasound. An ultrasound can show your bursae, as well as the muscles, tendons and ligaments in your heel.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is heel bursitis treated?

Heel bursitis treatment depends on what’s causing your pain.

You may be able to relieve pain and inflammation on your own with:

Rest. Stop any activities that cause or worsen pain, including walking, running or jumping. This will give the bursa time to heal.
Ice. Apply an ice pack covered in a light towel to your heel and ankle for up to 20 minutes three to four times per day.
Proper footwear. Don’t wear shoes that are too tight or have a stiff heel. Wear shoes with a U- or V-shaped indentation in the back collar to protect your Achilles tendon.
Medications. Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs), like ibuprofen and naproxen, may reduce the pain and inflammation.

Your healthcare provider may treat heel bursitis with:

Orthotics. Heel wedges encourage proper walking form and reduce irritation in your heel. You can buy heel wedges in a store. Your podiatrist can also make custom heel wedges for your foot.
Physical therapy. Stretching your Achilles tendon will take pressure off your heel bursa. Calf stretches, toe-to-wall stretches and heel drop stretches — as well as strengthening — may all provide relief.
Antibiotics. If an infection caused your bursitis, your healthcare provider will prescribe oral antibiotics.
Bursa injections. In rare cases, your healthcare provider may inject a steroid into your heel. This will decrease inflammation.
Surgery. Surgery is rarely needed. But if your pain hasn’t improved in six to 12 months, you may have to see a foot and ankle surgeon to surgically remove the affected bursa (bursectomy).
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

Questions you may want to ask your provider about heel bursitis include:

What caused heel bursitis?
What can I do to manage my pain?
What treatments do you recommend?
What activities should I avoid? For how long?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have heel bursitis?

With proper diagnosis and treatment, the outlook for people with heel bursitis is good. Most people feel better after two to three weeks of home treatment. More serious cases may take six to 12 months.

Prevention
----------
How can I reduce my risk of heel bursitis?

You can reduce your risk of developing heel bursitis by:

Stretching and warming up before exercising
Wearing proper footwear when exercising
Walking and running on soft surfaces

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Heel bursitis is a common health condition that affects athletes, active people and people who stand a lot. If you develop pain in or around your heel, talk to your healthcare provider. Rest, stretching and strengthening exercises may reduce pain in your ankle and heel. If these methods don’t relieve your symptoms, your provider may recommend other options. While heel bursitis is a frustrating condition, you should be back on your feet again within a few weeks.
