Hypersensitivity Reactions
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/hypersensitivity-reactions

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions

Symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions depend on the specific type and reaction. It’s possible to have symptoms from multiple types of hypersensitivity reactions at the same time.

Symptoms of type I

In general, symptoms of type I reactions may include:

Runny nose and sneezing
Coughing
Itchy eyes
Vomiting
Difficulty breathing or swallowing
Hives
Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat
Sudden drop in blood pressure
Symptoms of type II

Different kinds of type II reactions cause a wide variety of symptoms. Fever, tiredness and weakness are common in cytotoxic reactions.

Symptoms of type III

Symptoms common to many (but not all) forms of type III reactions include:

Joint pain and stiffness
Rashes and itching
Fatigue and weakness
Headaches
Fever
Hair loss
Shortness of breath
Symptoms of type IV

Type IV reactions can be mild or severe and almost always affect your skin.

Skin changes may include:

Pain
Rash
Peeling, flaking or scaling
Red to purple or darker than your natural skin tone
Oozing fluid or pus
Itching

You can also have fever, body aches and other symptoms.

Causes

An immune system overreaction causes all types of hypersensitivities. Antibodies cause types I, II and III. T-cell activation causes type IV. Antibody-mediated hypersensitivity reactions (types I, II and III) happen in two steps:

Sensitization: Something foreign (antigen) enters your body. Your immune system makes antibodies against it. Sensitization can also happen if your body accidentally makes antibodies against its own antigens.
Effect: The next time your body encounters the antigen, it triggers your immune system to attack it or try to flush it out.
What triggers hypersensitivity?

Antigens from outside your body (extrinsic) or ones that are part of your body (intrinsic) can trigger different types of hypersensitivity reactions.

Common triggers include:

Pet dander, pollen, dust mites and other allergens
Food
Prescription drugs
Plants like poison ivy or poison oak
Bee stings or bug bites
Infectious diseases (viruses, bacteria, fungi and parasites)
Antivenom for snake bites
Vaccines

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Hypersensitivity causes a wide range of diseases and reactions. So, how your provider diagnoses you will depend on your symptoms and medical history. You might need blood tests, imaging, allergy skin tests or other tests to get an accurate diagnosis.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

Treatment for hypersensitivity reactions depends on the specific type of disease or reaction. For instance, providers often treat type I reactions with antihistamines, inhaled medications (for asthma) and, in the case of severe reactions, epinephrine. Treatments for type II, type III and type IV reactions usually include corticosteroids and immunosuppressants.

Your treatment may be based on:

How severe your reaction is: For example, Stevens-Johnson syndrome often requires treatment in a hospital. But other type IV reactions, like a case of poison ivy, don’t.
How urgently you need treatment: For instance, anaphylaxis or severe asthma attacks are medical emergencies that need immediate treatment. Seasonal allergies, another type I reaction, rarely cause serious reactions. You can usually treat them at home.
Whether your condition is acute or chronic: Some hypersensitivities cause sudden, severe symptoms. Some cause ongoing or recurring conditions, like autoimmune diseases.
Whether you know what’s causing the reaction: Your provider will likely have you immediately stop any medications or treatments that are causing a reaction. Avoiding known allergens is the best way to prevent reactions in the future.
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to a healthcare provider if you have ongoing symptoms like fatigue, weakness and joint pain. Reach out to them if you’re having trouble managing allergies, asthma or autoimmune disease.

It might be helpful to ask your provider:

What might’ve caused this reaction?
How can I avoid it in the future?
What do I do if I have another reaction?
What are my treatment options?
How do I take this medication?
How do I take care of myself at home?
When should I go to the ER?

Call 911 or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of a serious reaction, including:

Difficulty breathing
Chest pain
Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat
Sudden and severe low blood pressure
A wound that’s very painful, not healing or getting larger
Large bubbles or blisters that are red, brown, dark green or black
Ulcers or sores filled with foul-smelling fluid

Make sure you let your provider know if you’ve taken any new medications or if there’s anything else you can think of that could’ve caused a reaction.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have a hypersensitivity reaction?

Most hypersensitivity reactions have a good prognosis (outcome). But what you can expect depends on your specific reaction or disease. Chronic conditions, like most autoimmune diseases or asthma, are manageable. But their treatment is usually lifelong.

The most severe and deadly hypersensitivity reactions, like toxic epidermal necrolysis, are very rare.

Prevention
----------
Can this be prevented?

The thing about hypersensitivities is that researchers don’t know who will get them or what they’ll react to. You often can’t prevent the first reaction to an allergen or trigger, but in some cases (like food or medication allergies), you can prevent subsequent reactions in the future by avoiding the trigger. Other hypersensitivity reactions, like autoimmune diseases, can’t be avoided because they’re a reaction to proteins that are part of your body.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Like all of us, your immune system can make mistakes. But instead of embarrassingly calling your teacher “Mom” or inconveniently forgetting something on your grocery list, immune system mistakes can lead to hypersensitivity reactions. These can cause lifelong diseases or severe reactions. Talk to a healthcare provider if you have concerning symptoms. If you’re having a severe reaction, call 911 or go to the emergency room.
