Hypopnea
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/hypopnea

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of hypopneas

Daytime symptoms of hypopneas may include:

Daytime fatigue and/or sleepiness
Headaches
Mood changes
Sexual dysfunction

Nighttime symptoms of hypopneas may include:

Frequent middle-of-the-night wakeups
Choking or gasping sound while breathing
Loud snoring

A sleeping partner is usually the first person to notice nighttime symptoms. Your partner may tell you about them in the morning.

Hypopnea causes

A partial airway blockage causes an obstructive hypopnea. If something is blocking the path of air into your lungs, you won’t be able to take in all of the air possible.

Some of the most common causes include:

Airway narrowing from a condition like hypothyroidism or obesity
Your jaw shape
Your tonsil size

Central hypopneas happen due to a miscommunication between your brain and your muscles. Under normal circumstances, your brain sends signals to breathing-related muscles to tell them to move when you sleep. Sometimes, these signals don’t get where they need to go. As a result, you aren’t able to breathe as often or as well as you would if you were awake.

Some structural abnormalities in your brain may cause this (like in your brainstem). Heart problems may also cause this. It could also be a side effect of taking certain medications. The cause may also be unknown.

Risk factors

You may be more at risk of having hypopneas if you:

Have overweight or obesity
Smoke
Take certain medications (like sedatives)
Have alcohol use disorder
Have a condition that narrows your airway
Complications of hypopneas

Hypopneas may lead to potentially life-threatening outcomes over time if untreated, like:

Heart disease
Heart attack
Stroke

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose hypopneas

A healthcare provider will diagnose hypopneas after a sleep study. During a physical exam, your provider will learn more about your symptoms and your health history.

A sleep study identifies how many hypopnea events you have during sleep and how frequently they occur. This overnight test happens at a sleep laboratory. Sensors monitor your heart rate, breathing, blood-oxygen levels and more.

Your provider will use the apnea hypopnea index (AHI) to see how many hypopnea events you have per hour of sleep. They’ll use the AHI score to identify the severity.

Some at-home sleep studies may show your apnea hypopnea index as well. But these can miss certain types of hypopneas.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How are hypopneas treated?

Treatment for hypopneas is typically a combination of methods, including:

CPAP machine: A CPAP machine is a device that increases air pressure in your airway. You’ll wear a mask and turn on the device when you sleep.
Lifestyle changes: Your provider may suggest reducing your risk factors like managing any underlying conditions, stopping smoking or maintaining a healthy weight.
Oral appliances (mouthpieces): An oral appliance is a device that you put in your mouth when you sleep. It holds your jaw and tongue forward to keep your airway open.
Surgery: Certain surgeries can remove airway blockages that cause obstructive hypopnea.

Your provider will help you find the right combination of treatments that work best for you. Treatment for hypopneas varies from person to person.

Do hypopneas require a CPAP?

Not all cases require a CPAP. But your healthcare provider may recommend this machine if you have an apnea hypopnea index score that’s moderate to severe, or if it’s mild but you have certain other health conditions or symptoms. Your provider will let you know if a CPAP is a good option to treat hypopneas.

When should I see a healthcare provider?

Visit a healthcare provider if you feel exhausted when you wake up or have frequent middle-of-the-night wakeups. A sleeping partner may mention that they noticed choking or loud snoring while you were sleeping. A provider can help you figure out what’s causing these symptoms.

If you have hypopneas, let your provider know if you notice new or worsening symptoms. It’s important to follow up with your provider regularly so they can monitor how well your treatment plan is going and make adjustments as needed.

What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

You may want to ask your provider:

Do I have apneas, hypopneas or both?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
Do I need to use a CPAP machine?
Are there side effects of treatment?
Am I a candidate for surgery?
Can you recommend any lifestyle changes for me?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have hypopneas?

Hypopneas may make getting a good night’s rest difficult. But this is a manageable condition with a variety of treatment options to fit your lifestyle and needs. Your provider will help you find one or a combination of treatments that work best to improve your nighttime breathing. You may need to do another sleep study to see how well your treatment is working.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
It isn’t easy living with a sleep-related breathing condition, like having hypopnea. No matter how much sleep you try to get, you’re not breathing enough. This means that you’re waking up more often in the middle of the night. As a result, your daytime hours may feel exhausting. If you’re not getting the rest you need, it’s time to talk to a healthcare provider.
