Alzheimer’s Disease
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/9164-alzheimers-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. Alzheimer’s is pronounced “alz-HAI-mers.” It’s a neurodegenerative disease that affects your brain. This means it damages and destroys cells in your brain over time. Eventually, people with AD lose some of their brain functions, including memory and language.

Alzheimer’s disease affects approximately 24 million people worldwide. One in 10 people older than 65 have it. Nearly 1 in 3 people older than 85 have AD.

Healthcare providers can suggest treatments to manage symptoms, but there’s no cure for Alzheimer’s disease. Talk to a provider if you’re worried you or a loved one have AD symptoms.

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
(Not available)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is Alzheimer’s disease diagnosed?

Healthcare providers diagnose Alzheimer’s disease in a few ways. The first step is discussing your current health and medical history.

Your provider will talk to you and your loved ones. They’ll ask you questions to understand your health and daily routine. Tell your provider if you know you have any risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.

Your provider will ask your loved ones if they’ve noticed any symptoms or changes you might not be able to see in yourself. They might ask about your:

Ability to do your usual activities
Changes in your mood, behavior and personality
Current medications
Medical history
Overall health

Your provider will also give you a complete physical exam and neurological exam. They’ll rule out other conditions that cause similar memory issues and other symptoms.

Your provider will also use a few tests, including:

Blood tests
Brain MRI
Cognitive tests
CT scan
PET scan
Psychiatric and mental health evaluations
Urine tests

These tests can help your provider look for signs of amyloid proteins and see if they have damaged your brain.

Your provider will work with you and your loved ones to develop a treatment plan that fits your unique needs. They’ll help you set realistic goals for your short-term health and long-term outlook.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What are Alzheimer’s disease treatments?

Your provider will suggest treatments to slow down how fast you develop dementia. There’s no cure for Alzheimer’s, but treatments may manage symptoms as they happen and slow down the condition’s progression.

Starting treatment as soon as possible is the best way to maintain your brain health throughout your life. But there currently isn’t a treatment available that stops or reverses Alzheimer’s disease.

There are many medications that can manage Alzheimer’s symptoms. Your provider will suggest a combination that fits your unique needs. You might need:

Cholinesterase inhibitors

These medications block an enzyme that can speed up how quickly Alzheimer’s damages your brain. They can improve some memory problems and reduce your risk of behavior changes. Your provider might prescribe:

Donepezil
Galantamine
Rivastigmine
Clinical trials

Scientists are always researching Alzheimer’s disease and possible treatments. Ask your provider if there are any clinical trials that could help you. Clinical trials are tests or research studies done using human volunteers who have a condition or issue. A trial might help you try new treatments that aren’t widely available yet.

There may be more opportunities to participate in clinical trials the sooner you’re diagnosed.

Lecanemab or donanemab

Lecanemab and donanemab are intravenous (IV) infusions. They’re two types of monoclonal antibodies. These are medications that can help your body’s immune system target and destroy amyloid proteins. They can slow down Alzheimer’s progression by getting rid of some of the amyloid before it damages your brain.

Lecanemab targets amyloid fibers before they stick together. Donanemab targets amyloid proteins that have already clumped together to form plaques.

Like all other treatments, these medications aren’t cures for Alzheimer’s disease. And they can’t reverse any damage that amyloid has already done.

NMDA antagonists

If you have Alzheimer’s, your body makes too much glutamate, which damages your brain’s cells. NMDA antagonists block or fill up the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors glutamate binds to in your brain. This can slow down how fast Alzheimer’s progresses.

Memantine is a common NMDA antagonist. Your provider may suggest others depending on your health and which stage of Alzheimer’s disease you have.

Symptom-management medications

Your provider will suggest medications or other treatments to manage specific symptoms as they develop. You may need:

Antidepressants. These drugs can treat anxiety, restlessness, mood swings and depression.
Antipsychotics (neuroleptics). These drugs can treat paranoia, hallucinations and agitation.
Antiseizure medications. These medications can also sometimes treat mood changes.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the life expectancy?

Alzheimer’s disease affects everyone differently. Most people older than 65 with Alzheimer’s die within four to eight years of being diagnosed. But some people live for decades, especially if they were diagnosed before turning 65.

Talk to your provider about living with AD. They’ll help you set realistic goals and expectations. They can also help you and your loved ones decide when hospice care is a good option for you.

Talk to a mental health professional if you need support. It’s extremely common for people with AD and their loved ones to feel extra stress and anxiety, especially right after diagnosis. Those feelings are real and valid. A mental healthcare provider can help you process your thoughts and emotions.

Prevention
----------
How can you prevent Alzheimer’s disease?

There are some Alzheimer’s risk factors you can’t change or control, like your age and genetics. But you may be able to manage other factors to help reduce your risk. Maintaining your overall health can help protect your brain from cognitive decline. You can try to:

Follow a healthy eating plan. Eating a variety of nutritious foods can help maintain your brain and overall health. Your provider might suggest you follow a specific eating plan like the Mediterranean or DASH diet.
Get plenty of physical activity. Exercise and physical activities increase blood flow and oxygen to your brain, which may improve your brain cell health. You don’t have to be a high-level athlete to stay active. Walking, gardening, riding a bike or any hobby that makes you move your body can be great ways to stay active.
Stay mentally active. Play board games, read, do crossword puzzles, play a musical instrument or do other hobbies that challenge your brain to use and learn new skills.
Stay socially connected. Regularly talk with your loved ones or people in your community. Joining group activities, such as religious services, exercise classes, book clubs or community volunteer work can all help keep your brain engaged.

Talk to your provider about genetic testing if you’re worried about Alzheimer’s running in your biological family. They can screen you for the genes or genetic changes that may increase your risk of AD.

Living With
-----------
When should I see my healthcare provider?

See a healthcare provider if you or a loved one are experiencing issues with memory or thinking. They can determine if the issues are due to Alzheimer’s or another condition.

You’ll need regular check-ups with your healthcare provider after you’ve been diagnosed with AD. Your provider will monitor the condition’s progression and adjust your treatments as needed.

You might want to ask your provider a few questions, like:

What symptoms or changes should I and my loved ones watch out for?
Is there any way to estimate how quickly Alzheimer’s will progress?
Which treatments are best for me?
Am I a good candidate for a clinical trial?

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) can be scary. It can feel like time has stopped or is moving too fast all at the same time. There’s no right or wrong way to live with a condition like Alzheimer’s disease.

Whether you have Alzheimer’s or are caring for a loved one living with AD, your healthcare providers are there for you. They’ll of course suggest treatments and clinical trials. But they can also answer your questions, connect you with resources and help make sure you understand what to expect.
