Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in Adults
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/5197-attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-adhd-in-adults

Overview
--------
What is adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder?

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is a condition that affects the development of your brain. It starts in childhood. While people commonly outgrow this condition, many don’t.

In children, ADHD can affect things like school performance and social skills. It can have very similar effects in adults, affecting things like work performance, friendships, relationships and mental health.

How does this condition affect my body?

People with ADHD are “neurodivergent.” This term means your brain developed differently. When those differences are big enough, they can cause conditions like ADHD. People who don’t have those brain differences are “neurotypical,” meaning their brains developed in a typical way.

People with ADHD tend to have lower-than-expected activity in certain brain areas. The affected areas regulate communication between other brain areas, giving you a set of abilities known as “executive functions.” These include your ability to plan, reason, make decisions and steer and focus your attention. ADHD disrupts these abilities, a symptom known as “executive dysfunction.”

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
(Not available)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is ADHD in adults diagnosed?

A healthcare provider, usually a psychologist or psychiatrist, can diagnose ADHD based on your medical history and current symptoms. As part of diagnosing ADHD, your provider will ask you about your current symptoms and symptoms you had when you were a child. This usually involves a questionnaire designed specifically for diagnosing ADHD. Currently, there aren’t any lab or medical tests that can help diagnose ADHD.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is ADHD in adults treated?

There’s no cure for ADHD, but it’s very treatable.

Medications

Medication is the most common and effective way to treat ADHD, and multiple types of medications can treat it. A few examples of those types include stimulants, non-stimulants and antidepressants.

You may need to try different medications and dosages to find one that works for you. Your healthcare provider can also tell you about the possible complications and side effects of these medications.

Psychotherapy and adaptation strategies

Many adults with ADHD benefit from treatments like psychotherapy (the technical term for mental health therapy). They may also use adaptation strategies, such as setting consistent routines, keeping a planner or notebook and using smartphone apps. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about therapy methods and lifestyle adjustments that might help.

Care for related conditions

It’s common for adults with ADHD to have other health conditions, especially certain mental health or brain development-related conditions. Examples of these include:

Anxiety, especially social anxiety.
Depression.
Specific learning disorders, such as dyslexia or dyscalculia.
Stress and related health problems.
Substance use disorders.
Workplace accommodations

Accommodations are tools or changes in your work environment that help you manage a condition. These are like step stools for someone who’s shorter than average; a step stool allows a shorter person to reach the same heights as taller people. Likewise, accommodations make it possible for you to achieve and succeed like people without the condition.

In the U.S., under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), some individuals with ADHD symptoms that interfere with their work may qualify for reasonable work accommodations. More information about workplace accommodations is available through government agencies.

The main agency responsible is the Department of Labor, including its Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP). That office also runs the Job Accommodation Network (JAN), which offers free, confidential assistance and guidance to people needing help with job accommodation concerns and questions.

ADHD accommodation examples include:

Breaks that allow you time to stand up and walk around.
Noise-canceling headphones to minimize distractions from noise.
Working from home (when possible).
Mentoring or job coaching assistance.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have adult ADHD?

If you have adult ADHD, the effects that you experience depend on which subtype you have and symptom severity. Medication, therapy and other conventional approaches are usually enough for most people to manage this condition. These treatments allow most people with ADHD to have careers, relationships and families.

ADHD advantages

People with ADHD have brains that developed differently, and those differences aren’t always negative. Research shows that they can often become advantages or strengths. Some of those include:

Creativity. People with ADHD commonly excel in creative professions. Differences in how your brain works can make it easier to find unconventional or innovative solutions.
Energy and motivation. Hyperactivity can be a powerful driving force, propelling you to achieve goals.
Hyper-focus. You can “hyper-focus” on interesting or fun tasks. Instead of being distractible, you tune out everything else and apply yourself entirely to what you’re doing. Experts associate this ability with higher levels of productivity and achievement.
Agreeableness. People with ADHD are often more agreeable and empathetic to those around them. You can be a strong “team player” and often want to help to others.

Businesses and corporations are also aware of the positive aspects of ADHD. Many corporations seek to hire neurodivergent people (including those with ADHD) for positions where their brain differences are an advantage.

How long does adult ADHD last?

ADHD is a lifelong condition. It doesn’t go away and there’s no way to cure it. However, research shows that the severity of the symptoms tends to decrease in older adults, especially after age 60.

What’s the outlook for this condition?

ADHD isn’t a dangerous condition on its own. If adult ADHD goes untreated — especially when it’s more severe — it can negatively affect your life in several ways. These include a higher risk for:

Injury. Key ADHD symptoms like impulsivity, hyperactivity and inattention can all contribute to injuries. This can also increase the risk of mental health conditions like anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Substance use disorders. People with ADHD are more likely to self-medicate with alcohol or non-prescribed drugs. That contributes to an increased risk of substance use disorders.
Legal problems and incarceration. Having ADHD means you have a higher risk of developing conditions with strong links to criminal behavior, such as antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder. Experts suspect that’s part of why ADHD rates are higher than average among people with criminal convictions.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
How do I take care of myself?

If you have ADHD, your healthcare provider can prescribe medication and recommend treatments and adjustments you can make in your life that can help with this condition. Some of the best things you can do include:

Taking your medication as prescribed. It’s important to take ADHD medications exactly as prescribed. Taking them that way makes it more likely that you’ll get their full benefits. If you take stimulants, taking them as prescribed also prevents dependence or addiction.
Finding ways to adapt and compensate. ADHD can look very different from person to person, so the strategies to help you compensate can vary widely. Find what works for you and build those strategies into your life. They can make it easier to live with and work around the effects of ADHD.
Taking advantage of technology. Smartphone apps and other technological means can help you adapt to this condition. There are also online communities where people with ADHD share information and discuss their experiences. Those can be resources to help you better understand and adapt to this condition.
When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should see your healthcare provider as recommended, especially if you take medication or receive any other type of treatment. If you take stimulant medications, state or national laws may require you to see your provider regularly so they can continue to prescribe your medication. Your healthcare provider can tell you more about this and recommend a schedule for these visits.

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Who does it affect?

ADHD can affect anyone, but men are more likely to receive this diagnosis. However, there’s evidence that ADHD in women is often undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. There’s also disagreement on whether the condition affects people differently based on race or ethnicity. More research is necessary to determine if these factors can cause differences in the way the condition affects people.

How common is this condition?

ADHD in adults is relatively common. Experts estimate it affects between 2.5% and 6.76% of adults worldwide. That means this condition affects between 139 million and 360 million people worldwide.

Experts estimate that 15% to 20% of adults diagnosed as children still fully meet the criteria for it, and another 40% to 60% continue to have at least some of the symptoms.

What is the difference between adult ADD vs. adult ADHD?

ADD is an outdated name that refers to the inattention subtype of ADHD. In 1987, the American Psychiatric Association set this condition’s name to what it is today, “attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.” The most recent text revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5-TR™), breaks the condition down into inattentive, hyperactivity/impulsivity and combined subtypes.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a condition that affects brain development, causing hyperactivity, impulsive behavior or inattention. This condition starts in childhood, and many children — but not all — grow out of it. ADHD in adults can affect your work performance, social relationships and more.

While this condition can be disruptive, it’s also very treatable. There are many medication options and other ways to treat it. It’s even possible to turn this condition’s effects into advantages that can help you in the workplace and your personal life. If you think you have ADHD, getting diagnosed can help. With treatment, it’s possible to harness the effects and turn them into tools for success.
