Pearson Syndrome
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/pearson-syndrome

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Pearson syndrome

Pearson syndrome symptoms might include:

Easy bruising
Fatigue and weakness
Frequent bouts of diarrhea
Frequent infections
Growth faltering (children may be shorter or weigh less than their peers)
Pale skin
Poor muscle tone
Vomiting
Yellowing of skin and the whites of their eyes (jaundice)

Other issues may develop over time, including:

Diabetes
Hearing loss
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, a condition that affects your neuromuscular system and heart
Movement disorders or seizures
Vision problems like droopy eyelids, retinitis pigmentosa and cataracts
Pearson syndrome causes

Pearson syndrome happens when there are defects in your mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Mitochondria, found in nearly all your body’s cells, produce the energy your cells need to function properly. When mitochondria are defective, cells don’t receive adequate energy, leading them to become damaged or die prematurely. Scientists haven’t yet fully understood why these mtDNA defects occur or how they directly lead to symptoms.

Is Pearson syndrome inherited?

Most cases of Pearson syndrome occur for unknown reasons. While it can be inherited (passed down from biological parent to child), those cases are rare and not well understood.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose Pearson syndrome

If your provider suspects that your child has Pearson syndrome, they may order the following tests:

Blood tests
Bone marrow biopsy
Stool test
Urinalysis (urine test)

A pathologist will look at bone marrow cells under a microscope to identify abnormalities. These can include blood cells that contain fluid-filled pockets or red blood cells with iron buildup.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is Pearson syndrome treated?

There’s no cure for Pearson syndrome. Treatment aims to decrease symptoms and make your child more comfortable. This may include:

Blood transfusions
Physical therapy and occupational therapy
Stem cell transplant
Supplements such as coenzyme Q10, L-carnitine and vitamins
Treatment for infections with antibiotics and antivirals

Children who live past infancy may need to see several specialists for their livers, kidneys, hearts and pancreases.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the life expectancy for people with Pearson syndrome?

About half of people with Pearson syndrome die during infancy or early childhood. Only a few survive into their teenage years. The condition ultimately causes advanced lactic acidosis and organ failure.

How can I cope with Pearson syndrome?

Receiving a Pearson syndrome diagnosis can be overwhelming and difficult for your family. Surround yourself with supportive healthcare providers, family and friends. Joining support groups for families facing rare or serious childhood conditions might help you feel less isolated.

Educating others about mitochondria and Pearson syndrome isn’t your responsibility — plenty of resources exist. Your community likely wants to help but may be unsure how to do so. Be specific about your needs. Whether it’s spending private time with your child or having moments alone for yourself, clearly communicating your needs helps your community provide the right support. It’s OK to accept help with practical tasks like grocery shopping, dog walking or meal preparation.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Learning your child has a life-threatening illness like Pearson syndrome brings intense emotions. You may feel isolated because the disease is rare. Initially, the thought of joining support groups or researching resources may seem overwhelming or unnecessary. It’s normal to prioritize spending quality time with your child. But hang onto those recommendations just in case. Surrounding yourself with a network of support can help with any grief you’re feeling.
