Pinta
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/25091-pinta

Overview
--------
What is pinta?

Pinta is a skin disease you get from the bacteria Treponema carateum (T. carateum). It causes a rash that starts out small but spreads to other areas of your body. It leaves hard, discolored areas of skin. It only affects the middle layer of your skin (dermis) and doesn’t cause serious illness. But it’ll last for years if left untreated.

Pinta is part of a group of bacterial infections called endemic treponematoses, which also includes yaws and bejel. Some people also call it “mal del pinto” or “carate.”

Is pinta an STD?

The bacteria that cause pinta are similar to those that cause syphilis, but it’s not a sexually transmitted infection (STI). It usually spreads by skin-to-skin contact.

Where is pinta found?

Pinta is found in (endemic to):

Mexico.
Central America.
South America.
Caribbean countries.

It’s usually found in rural areas, where it spreads more easily.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of pinta?

The only symptom of pinta is a rash. It goes through several stages:

It starts as a raised, red bump or rash where you were infected. This is usually on your face, neck, hands or feet. It might itch. The bump will eventually grow larger and become thick and hard.
After a few months, additional thick, flat areas appear all over your body. They may start red but turn slate blue, brown or gray. They’re often very itchy.
Years later, the areas may turn a mix of brown and white (dyschromic macules). This is the late stage of pinta. In this stage, the skin changes are permanent.
What causes pinta?

The bacteria Treponema carateum cause pinta. You can get infected from close, skin-to-skin contact with someone who has it, especially if their skin has cuts or breaks in it. The rash is contagious in the first two stages but not the third (late stage).

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is pinta diagnosed?

A healthcare provider diagnoses pinta by looking at your skin. They may also test samples of the rash or your blood for T. carateum. Under a microscope, the bacteria that cause pinta and the bacteria that cause syphilis look the same. The only way to know the difference is by your symptoms.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is pinta treated?

Providers treat pinta with antibiotics. A single dose of azithromycin or benzathine penicillin G can cure pinta and stop it from being contagious in as little as 24 hours after treatment. The rash in the first two stages can heal over time (several months). But the damage caused by late-stage skin changes (plaques) is irreversible, even after antibiotic treatment.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What’s the outlook for pinta?

Pinta is easy to treat and has a good outlook (prognosis). If you’re treated in the first two stages, you can make a full recovery. Late-stage skin discolorations are permanent, though they shouldn’t itch anymore.

Prevention
----------
Can you prevent pinta?

You can prevent pinta by avoiding contact with the rash until the person is no longer contagious (about 24 hours after receiving antibiotics). Contact with late-stage rashes doesn’t spread pinta. To prevent infection, healthcare providers can also treat close contacts of people with pinta — like family or household members — with antibiotics.

Living With
-----------
How do I take care of myself?

Once a healthcare provider has treated you for pinta, ask how to take care of your skin until it heals. They may be able to prescribe or recommend treatments to promote proper healing.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

See your healthcare provider if:

You’ve traveled to or live in an area with pinta and have symptoms.
Someone you’ve been in close contact with has been diagnosed with pinta.

Early treatment can cure the infection before it causes permanent skin damage.

What questions should I ask my doctor?

It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:

What stage is this?
Will my skin heal?
How do I protect my skin while it heals?
Should my close contacts be treated with antibiotics?
For how long am I contagious?

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Pinta is a rare but easily treatable bacterial skin infection. Early skin changes can heal, but if left untreated, late-stage discoloration is permanent. Talk to your provider if you think you have pinta or have been exposed to it. Early treatment will give your skin the best chance to heal.
