Plantar Fibromatosis (Ledderhose Disease)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/plantar-fibromatosis-ledderhose-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of plantar fibromatosis

Ledderhose disease causes a collection of bumps to form on the bottom of your foot. It can be uncomfortable and make it hard for you to perform your daily activities. Other plantar fibromatosis symptoms may include:

Foot pain and swelling
Difficulty standing and/or walking
Toes curling down toward the bottom of your foot
Inability to straighten your toes
Ledderhose disease causes

Researchers don’t know what exactly causes plantar fibromatosis. It may be related to several factors, including:

Genetics
Related health conditions, like Dupuytren contracture, Peyronie’s disease and knuckle pads
Trauma or injury to your feet
Risk factors of plantar fibromatosis

Ledderhose disease affects people of any age. But, it’s more common in people between the ages of 30 and 50. It’s also more common in people:

Of northwestern European descent
Who are male
Who smoke

In addition, plantar fibromatosis often affects people who have certain health conditions, including:

Alcohol use disorder
Diabetes
Dupuytren contracture
Epilepsy
Frozen shoulder
Knuckle pads
Peyronie’s disease

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose Ledderhose disease

Before examining your foot, your healthcare provider may ask several questions, including:

Do you have a biological family history of plantar fibromatosis?
Have you ever been diagnosed with a similar condition, like Dupuytren contracture?
Do you have diabetes?
Do you have epilepsy?

Your healthcare provider will then examine your foot. They’ll:

Check for swelling, bruising, lumps, sores or deformities
Note any tender or painful areas along the bottom of your foot and heel
Look over your Achilles tendon and the muscles around the tendon
Check your foot’s range of motion
Ask you to walk a short distance and note how your feet and ankles move
Tests that are used to diagnose plantar fibromatosis

Your healthcare provider may conduct the following tests to diagnose plantar fibromatosis:

Ultrasound. After examining your signs, symptoms and medical history, your healthcare provider may perform an ultrasound to confirm their clinical diagnosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). With advanced stages of Ledderhose disease, nodules may extend deeper into the bottom of your foot (although, this is extremely rare). An MRI shows how aggressive your case may be.
Biopsy. Your healthcare provider may remove some tissue, cells or fluid from your foot (biopsy). A biopsy will confirm that a growth isn’t a cancerous tumor.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is plantar fibromatosis treated?

In its earliest stages, plantar fibromatosis treatment may include:

Ice. Apply an ice pack covered in a light towel to the bottom of your foot for up to 20 minutes, three to four times per day.
Medications. Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) — like aspirin, ibuprofen and naproxen — can reduce pain and inflammation.
Orthotics. Over-the-counter (OTC) shoe inserts or custom orthotics provide relief. You can cut holes into your shoe inserts around the growths on your foot to prevent direct pressure.
Massage. Gently massage the bottom of your foot. Avoid touching the growths because that may increase your pain.
Physical therapy. Work with a physical therapist to stretch and strengthen the connective tissues in the bottom of your feet.

If your pain doesn’t decrease or stop after several months of conservative treatment, your healthcare provider may suggest:

Intralesional steroids
Verapamil
Radiation therapy
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy (ESWT)
Tamoxifen
Sorafenib
Collagenase injection
Surgery
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Schedule an appointment with your healthcare provider if you:

Notice growths or bumps near the middle of the bottom of your feet
Have difficulty standing or walking
Experience long-lasting pain in the bottom of your feet
Have trouble straightening your toes

Questions you may wish to ask your provider include:

What activities should I avoid? For how long?
What can I do to manage my pain?
What treatments do you recommend?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have plantar fibromatosis?

Ledderhose disease can cause painful growths on the bottom of your feet that may continue to get worse without treatment. Fortunately, the disease doesn’t spread and isn’t life-threatening. But you should still see your provider to rule out any other conditions and seek appropriate treatment.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Though plantar fibromatosis is rare, it can be a very painful and frustrating condition to live with. As the disease progresses, you may notice it’s getting harder and harder to walk or even stand without enduring pain. Luckily, the growths involved with Ledderhose disease aren’t cancerous, but they can still affect your life in a negative way. If you’re experiencing symptoms of the condition, talk to your healthcare provider. In its earliest stages, you can treat plantar fibromatosis conservatively. In later stages, your provider may refer you to a foot and ankle specialist.
