Polydactyly (Extra Fingers or Toes)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/24302-polydactyly-extra-digits

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of polydactyly

The only symptom of polydactyly is your child having more than five fingers or toes on their hand or foot. The extra digits will be visible at their birth.

Depending on which type of polydactyly your baby has, their extra fingers or toes might be fully developed and look like the rest of their digits. But the additional digits are usually less developed than typical fingers or toes, and might be attached by only skin or nerves.

Polydactyly causes

A change to your baby’s genes while they’re developing causes polydactyly. Genes are the biological building blocks that you pass down to your children. They contain instructions for the function and growth of every cell in your body.

Anything that interrupts a gene while your baby is developing can cause changes in their body. Sometimes, these changes are things we never notice, and other times, they cause issues like polydactyly and other congenital (present at birth) conditions.

If something disrupts the genes that are responsible for developing your baby’s hands and feet, there’s a chance they might be born with polydactyly. Genetic disorders can interfere with these genes, but so can environmental factors (things that happen to or around someone who’s pregnant).

Genetic disorders that may occur with polydactyly include:

Carpenter syndrome
Down syndrome
Fanconi anemia
Risk factors for polydactyly

Polydactyly can affect anyone, but the condition occurs in certain babies more than others. Risk factors for developing extra fingers or toes include:

Sex. Male babies are more likely to develop polydactyly than female babies.
Ethnicity. Polydactyly is 10 times more common in Black male babies than white male babies. The condition is 22 times more common in Black female babies than white female babies.
Family history. Your baby may be more likely to have polydactyly if you have a family history of genetic disorders, especially if any immediate relatives were born with extra fingers or toes.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose polydactyly

Your healthcare provider may be able to diagnose polydactyly with an ultrasound test before your baby is born. Otherwise, your baby’s provider will be able to diagnose the condition when your baby is born. They’ll identify any extra digits on your child’s hands or feet and will diagnose a type of polydactyly.

Depending on the type of polydactyly, your baby might need a hand X-ray or foot X-ray before receiving treatment.

Genetic testing for polydactyly

If you have a biological family history of polydactyly, you may want to speak with a genetic counselor. They can help you decide if genetic testing is right for you. Genetic testing can screen for gene variants, including the variants that cause polydactyly.

If you’re the carrier of a genetic variant, it doesn’t necessarily mean your child will develop a genetic disorder. A genetic counselor can explain your risk and what you can do to protect your health or reduce your risk of passing genetic issues on to your children.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is polydactyly treated?

Treatment for polydactyly depends on the type of condition your baby has, but it usually involves removing the extra digit from your child’s hand or foot. There are a few different ways to remove the extra finger or toe. These methods include:

Surgical ligature. Your baby’s provider will tie a tight string or band around the base of the extra finger that cuts off its blood supply. A week or two later, the extra finger will fall off.
In-office excision. Your baby’s provider will numb the skin around your child’s extra digit with an injection. Then, they’ll use a cautery device to remove the extra finger or toe.
Polydactyly surgery. If your baby’s polydactyly is on their feet or they’re not a good candidate for surgical ligature or in-office excision, they’ll need to have their extra digit surgically removed.
When should my baby see their healthcare provider?

If you notice any changes in your baby’s digits, make a call to their provider. It’s important that your baby sees their provider if they have any pain or if the removal site has any of the following symptoms:

Bleeding
Leaking fluid or discharge
Skin discoloration
Swelling

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if my baby has polydactyly?

Don’t worry if your baby has polydactyly. You can expect them to make a full recovery after they have the extra digit removed. The removal process will have no impact on their future growth or development.

If your child has another birth defect or genetic condition, they might need other types of treatment or care. Talk to their healthcare provider about what to expect in the future.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
It might be surprising to see an extra finger or toe after your baby is born. But don’t be too alarmed. Polydactyly is a treatable condition that has no long-term impacts on your baby’s growth and development. All methods of removal have quick recovery times and won’t impact your baby’s ability to use their hand or foot in the future. If you have any concerns about this or other genetic conditions, talk to your healthcare provider.
