Postherpetic Neuralgia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/12093-postherpetic-neuralgia

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Postherpetic neuralgia symptoms

Symptoms may start while you have a shingles rash or after the rash goes away. This could be a few weeks to months later. Symptoms could include:

Pain (aching, burning, sharp, shooting, shocking) that’s constant or comes and goes
Itchy skin
Loss of feeling or numbness
Sensitive skin (to touch, pressure or temperature changes)

The pain can feel different from person to person.

Causes of postherpetic neuralgia

PHN happens when shingles damages your nerve fibers. These damaged nerves send stronger pain signals to your brain than they should. This causes ongoing pain. Doctors still don’t know exactly why some people develop this condition after shingles while others don’t.

The same virus that causes chickenpox (varicella-zoster virus) also causes shingles. After you have chickenpox, the virus stays in your body. It stays “asleep” for many years. If the virus becomes active again, it causes shingles.

Risk factors for postherpetic neuralgia

You may be at higher risk of developing PHN if you:

Are above age 50
Didn’t get the shingles vaccine
Had a severe rash, symptoms near your eyes or pain with shingles
Have diabetes
Have a weakened immune system
PHN complications

Living with long-term pain can affect many parts of your life and health, like:

Feeling sad or depressed
Feeling tired all the time
Sleeping less
Eating less than usual
Problems focusing or thinking clearly

If pain is making your daily life difficult, it’s important to ask for help. And you may want to talk to a mental health professional for emotional support resources.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose postherpetic neuralgia

Most of the time, doctors can tell if you have PHN by:

Checking your symptoms
Asking about your medical history
Doing a physical exam

If you had shingles without a rash or a rare type that affects your throat, your provider may order lab tests or imaging tests to be sure.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is postherpetic neuralgia treated?

If you have PHN, your healthcare provider will likely start by prescribing one of these medications:

Tricyclic antidepressants (like nortriptyline)
Antiseizure medications (like pregabalin or gabapentin)
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (like duloxetine)
Sodium channel blockers (like carbamazepine or suzetrigine)
Lidocaine cream or patch
Capsaicin cream or patch
Capsaicin 8% patch

Each of these medications has different side effects. They can also interact with other medications you take. Your provider will carefully review the possible side effects and risks with you.

It may take time to find a treatment that relieves symptoms. You may need to try more than one medication, or your provider may prescribe several medications at the same time. Contact your provider if your symptoms don’t improve. Take all of your medications exactly as prescribed.

For long-lasting and difficult-to-treat cases, your provider may recommend more invasive treatments for pain management, like:

Nerve blocks
Epidurals
Spinal cord stimulation
Cryoablation of intercostal nerves (less common)

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have postherpetic neuralgia?

While there isn’t a cure, there are treatments that can help lower how much pain you feel. Managing pain may take time. It could involve trying different treatments to find what works best for you. Some may help more than others. You’ll likely need to keep working with your provider to adjust your care as needed.

Coping with PHN takes patience. Taking care of both your body and mind can make a big difference. Talking with a mental health professional may also help you manage the emotional side of living with pain.

How long does postherpetic neuralgia last?

How long PHN lasts can be different for each person. For many, the pain lasts for months or even years. In some cases, the pain may never go away completely. But treatment options can help you manage it.

Prevention
----------
Can postherpetic neuralgia be prevented?

The best way to prevent PHN is by getting the shingles vaccine. The vaccine reduces your chances of getting shingles and the long-lasting nerve pain that can come with it. Adults usually get the vaccine in two doses, a few months apart.

There’s also a chickenpox vaccine. If you or your children have never had chickenpox, getting this vaccine may help prevent the virus from entering your body. If you never get chickenpox, you can’t get shingles or PHN later in life.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You may be living with postherpetic neuralgia (PHN), but at times, it might feel like you’re just getting through the days with pain. The symptoms can wear you down. You might feel too tired to run errands, find it hard to focus at work or skip time with friends because you’re not feeling your best.

Even though the pain is real, it doesn’t have to take over your life. A healthcare provider can help you manage it. There’s no one-size-fits-all treatment for PHN. It may take time to find what works best. But getting the right care may help you feel more like yourself again.
