Post-Gastrectomy Syndrome
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17377-post-gastrectomy-syndrome

Overview
--------
After a total gastrectomy, surgeons reconstruct your gastrointestinal tract by making new attachments that bypass your stomach.

What is a gastrectomy?

A gastrectomy is a surgery that removes all or part of your stomach. Your stomach is your digestive system’s food reservoir. It allows you to store and break down the food you eat before it travels to your small intestine, which absorbs nutrients.

But if you develop a condition like stomach (gastric) cancer, your stomach can cause more harm than good. In that case, you may need a gastrectomy. Although a gastrectomy changes your digestive system, you can live (and eat) without a stomach.

There are two main types of gastrectomy:

A total gastrectomy removes your entire stomach.
A partial gastrectomy includes several surgery types that remove part of your stomach. The procedure names vary based on how much stomach tissue gets removed. For example, a subtotal gastrectomy removes about 80% of your stomach. Some types are classified based on their purpose. For example, gastric sleeve surgery is a partial gastrectomy that treats severe (Class III) obesity.
What does gastrectomy treat?

Gastrectomy most commonly treats stomach cancer. You may need a total or partial gastrectomy to cure the cancer (eliminate it) or prevent it from spreading. Gastrectomy can also be palliative when the cancer isn’t curable. This means the surgery relieves cancer symptoms, like stomach bleeding and pain.

Healthcare providers sometimes use gastrectomy to treat other conditions. It may be a last resort when less invasive treatments like medicine and lifestyle changes haven’t helped enough.

Gastrectomy treats:

Benign stomach tumors. Tumors that cause symptoms or may become cancerous may need to be removed.
Gastritis. In rare cases, inflammation in your stomach lining can cause severe symptoms that medication can’t improve. You may need surgery.
Peptic ulcer disease. You may need surgery to treat stomach sores and ulcers that can damage your stomach lining.
Obesity. Your healthcare provider may recommend partial gastrectomy as a type of bariatric (weight loss) surgery if you have obesity that’s harming your health.
Injuries. You may need parts of your stomach removed if an injury has damaged the tissue beyond repair.

You may choose to have your stomach removed to prevent hereditary diffuse stomach cancer. You’re at high risk of developing this cancer if you inherit a mutation (error) in a gene called CDH1 from a biological parent. This cancer is nearly impossible to detect early when treatments work best. If you have this mutation, your healthcare provider may recommend total gastrectomy.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
(Not available)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
(Not available)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
(Not available)

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Your healthcare provider will only recommend a gastrectomy if the benefits outweigh the risks and stresses of adjusting to a changed digestive system. Getting used to life after this surgery requires time and patience. After all, for most of us, eating is one of the simplest and most enjoyable activities we experience each day. Having to be more deliberate about food and drink choices requires some adjustment. Still, many people who’ve had this surgery live full and healthy lives.

Ask your provider about what to expect during and after recovery. Understanding how your surgery may change your routines in the short and long term can help you approach the idea of a gastrectomy with more confidence.
