Pregnancy Rhinitis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/pregnancy-rhinitis

Overview
--------
What is pregnancy rhinitis?

Pregnancy rhinitis is nasal congestion (stuffy or blocked nose) or other nasal symptoms that happen during the later part of pregnancy and last for at least six weeks. Most people talk about food cravings and heartburn, but no one warns you that you might spend the last few months of your pregnancy feeling like you constantly have a cold. Fortunately, your blocked nose should get better within two weeks of delivery.

Is pregnancy rhinitis the same as a cold?

No, pregnancy rhinitis isn’t caused by a cold, allergy or sinus infection.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of pregnancy rhinitis?

The main symptom of pregnancy rhinitis is a stuffy nose. Other symptoms include:

Runny nose.
Nasal swelling.
Sneezing.
Postnasal drip.
Loss of smell (anosmia).
Difficulty sleeping (congestion is usually worse at night).
What causes pregnancy rhinitis?

Like most other discomforts during pregnancy, hormones are to blame for a stuffy nose while you’re expecting. Your nose has receptors — proteins that respond to signals in your body — that detect hormones like estrogen. Experts aren’t entirely sure why it happens, but in some people, higher levels of hormones cause the receptors to respond by widening blood vessels in your nose and creating mucus. This can block it and make it hard to breathe.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is pregnancy rhinitis diagnosed?

Healthcare providers diagnose pregnancy rhinitis if:

You’ve had a stuffy or runny nose for several weeks during pregnancy.
You don’t have allergies.
You aren’t sick with a cold or a sinus infection.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you treat pregnancy rhinitis?

Treatments your provider might recommend for pregnancy rhinitis include:

Corticosteroid nasal sprays (Flonase®, Nasacort®).
Nasal irrigation (saline nasal rinses). You use these with a neti pot or a rinse bottle.
Decongestant sprays (oxymetazoline, Afrin®, Sinex®). These are generally considered safe during pregnancy, but using them for longer than a few days can cause a rebound effect. This is when you become more congested when you stop using the spray and become dependent on using it to keep your nose clear. Rebound congestion continues even after you’ve delivered.

Ask your provider before using oral decongestants (Sudafed®, Nexafed®) during pregnancy. Some studies have shown that they can be harmful to a fetus, especially in the first trimester. Don’t use oral decongestants if you have high blood pressure.

What are other ways to unblock your sinuses during pregnancy?

Other ways you can help reduce congestion include:

Exercising. Blood flow helps reduce blood vessel swelling. Ask your provider about a safe amount of exercise during pregnancy.
Drinking plenty of water.
Sleeping slightly upright.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
How long does pregnancy rhinitis last?

Pregnancy rhinitis can last a few weeks or all the way up to delivery. For most people, it goes away within a few days to two weeks of delivery.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If a stuffy or runny nose is impacting your daily life, talk to your pregnancy care provider. They can make sure there isn’t another cause of your congestion (like allergies) and give you suggestions for ways to clear your nose.

What questions should I ask my doctor?

It might be helpful to ask a provider:

Is this pregnancy rhinitis or is something else causing my congestion?
Are there any treatments that might be helpful?
What medications are safe to take during pregnancy?
When should I follow up with you?

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Can I use nasal sprays while pregnant?

Most nasal sprays are safe to use during pregnancy. Corticosteroid sprays (like Flonase and Nasacort) and saline sprays can provide relief. Be careful with decongestant sprays with the ingredient oxymetazoline. They can cause rebound congestion, which makes it hard to stop using them.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Needing to nap at all hours of the day. Shoes that no longer fit. Never-ending trips to the bathroom. Not to be left out, your nose has decided it wants to be a part of the whole-body experience of pregnancy.

The constant congestion of pregnancy rhinitis can be frustrating. Knowing it won’t last forever might be of little comfort when you need to breathe well right now. Some people find that saline rinses, sleeping slightly upright and other at-home remedies can help. And you might need a combination of treatments to find something that works for you. Don’t hesitate to ask your pregnancy care provider how to get relief and what medications are OK to take. They’re there to help make your pregnancy experience as safe and comfortable as possible.
