Primary Immunodeficiency
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17964-primary-immunodeficiency

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Visit a healthcare provider if you think have any symptoms of a primary immunodeficiency.

Symptoms of primary immunodeficiency

Getting sick more often than usual is the most common symptom. You might catch infections more easily than people around you. And when you do get sick, you may experience more severe symptoms or complications.

You might notice that it takes you longer to recover from an illness than others. Infections may go away and come back, even after you start a treatment.

Other symptoms can include:

Needing antibiotics longer than usual
Enlarged spleen
Swollen lymph nodes
Unexplained weight loss or poor growth
Having diarrhea or other digestive issues often
Experiencing more side effects after getting a live vaccine

Most people with a PIDD experience symptoms before turning 20. But they can develop at any point in life.

Primary immunodeficiency causes

Genetic changes cause primary immunodeficiencies. They prevent your immune system from developing and working correctly. It might be:

Less active than it should be
Missing cells that it usually has
Completely missing

You can’t control the genetic changes — they happen before you’re born. Which genes are changed will determine the disorder you develop.

Risk factors for these diseases

The changes that cause primary immunodeficiencies often run in biological families. That means if your biological parents or siblings have a PIDD, you may be more likely to have one, too.

These disorders are more common in males.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose these disorders

A healthcare provider will diagnose a PIDD based on a few factors:

Your medical history (tell your provider if you know you’ve had any infections recently)
A physical exam
The symptoms you’re experiencing
Your family history (tell them if you know someone in your family has a PIDD)

Your provider will probably use a few tests, including:

Blood tests to look for signs of infections
Genetic testing to check for changed genes
Flow cytometry to examine a sample of your immune cells

Every state in the U.S. tests babies for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) when they’re born. That’s because SCID is fatal if it’s not treated right away.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How are these disorders treated?

Your healthcare provider will suggest ways to manage and prevent infections. The treatment you’ll need depends on which PIDD you have.

You might need:

Antibiotics to prevent or treat bacterial infections
Antivirals for viral infections
IVIG infusions to boost your immune system’s natural defenses
A stem cell transplant if you have a risk of life-threatening complications
Gene therapy that may repair or replace changed genes
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Visit a healthcare provider if you feel like you get sick too often. Everyone gets sick every once in a while. But you know your body better than anyone. You can tell when something doesn’t feel right.

Talk to your provider if you’ve started treatment for a PIDD and it feels like your medications aren’t working. Tell them if you have a fever or infection. They’ll suggest ways to avoid complications.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have a PIDD?

You’ll have to monitor your body for signs and symptoms of infections. And you may need to take medications for the rest of your life. Your healthcare provider will help you understand the best ways to avoid infections, including:

Washing your hands often (especially after going to the bathroom and before eating)
Staying up-to-date on the vaccinations your provider suggests
Getting enough sleep
Following a healthy eating plan
Getting enough physical activity

Your loved ones can help you stay safe and healthy, too. Ask them to let you know if they’re sick, feel unwell or have had an infection recently. This can help them avoid accidentally spreading infections when they see you in person.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Living with a primary immunodeficiency (PIDD) can feel like a lot of work. But you don’t have to do it alone. Your healthcare provider and loved ones can help. Your provider can suggest treatments. They can also recommend a support group if you’re interested in talking to other people with similar experiences. Your friends and family can help you avoid infections and plan safer social gatherings. Remember, having a condition like a PIDD is just a part of your health; it doesn’t define who you are. Only you can do that.
