Sensory Processing Disorder (SPD)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/sensory-processing-disorder-spd

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Sensory processing disorder (SPD) is a group of conditions that affect how your brain processes sensory information, like sights, sounds, smells, tastes, movement and touch.

Symptoms of sensory processing disorder

Symptoms vary based on the type of SPD. There are a lot of different symptoms, but some of the most common include:

Constantly bumping into things (clumsiness)
Feeling discomfort in certain types of clothing and fabric
Gagging when eating certain food textures
Needing to constantly touch things
Not recognizing personal space
Reacting to sudden movements, touches, loud noises and/or bright lights
Trouble using fine motor skills

Sensory processing disorder can affect one of your senses or multiple senses. They can also vary in severity or intensity.

Sensory processing disorder causes

Researchers don’t yet know the cause of sensory processing disorder. Studies show that genetics and environmental factors likely play a role.

Risk factors of sensory processing disorder

There’s a strong link between sensory processing disorder and neurodivergence. There’s also a link between certain mental health conditions. SPD commonly happens with (coexists with) the following conditions:

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
ADHD
Bipolar disorder
Developmental delays
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD)
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Schizophrenia
Specific learning disorders

You may have SPD without any other neurodevelopmental or psychiatric conditions.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose sensory processing disorder

As SPD isn’t yet an official medical condition, it tends to be under-diagnosed due to a lack of precise diagnostic criteria. But healthcare providers are recognizing it — and the benefits of treating it — more and more.

If you notice that your child’s sensory behavior isn’t typical, your child’s pediatrician may refer you to an occupational therapist. These professionals can assess your child for SPD by watching them interact with certain sensory experiences. They’ll also ask about your child’s symptoms, behavior and medical history to help in the diagnosis. Your pediatrician may also refer you to other specialists, depending on your child’s specific needs.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is sensory processing disorder treated?

There’s no cure for sensory processing disorder. But various types of occupational therapy can help manage the symptoms of SPD, especially if they affect your or your child’s daily life.

Occupational therapists (and pediatric occupational therapists) provide treatment to help you:

Meet developmental milestones (for children), like fine and gross motor skills
Improve self-care and activities of daily living
Improve play and social skills
Improve self-regulation skills and behavior

SPD can impact all aspects of life. Occupational therapists offer strategies for coping with sensory challenges for all ages.

Sensory integration therapy

Sensory integration therapy provides essential sensory input and experiences that will help you or your child learn to adapt. This is the most common and effective type of therapy for SPD. You’ll work with an occupational therapist for it.

It typically involves doing specific sensory activities tailored to your needs, which help regulate your sensory response. You can learn to interact with your senses without becoming overwhelmed. Additionally, you can learn coping skills for overcoming everyday interactions with certain sensory information.

Studies show that sensory integration therapy increases concentration, improves behavior and decreases anxiety levels.

Routine sensory activities at home and school

For school-age children, your child’s occupational therapist may recommend incorporating routine sensory activities and tools at home and school, alongside sensory integration therapy.

These activities and tools can help your child stay focused and organized during the day. They’re customized to your child’s unique needs.

For example, during school, a child with SPD may need:

Access to headphones to block out background noises while they work
Access to fidget toys
A designated break to do a sensory activity, like walking, spinning or swinging

Your child’s occupational therapist will recommend specific strategies for them.

Occupational therapy for fine and gross motor skills

If your child has dyspraxia or postural disorder, they may need help strengthening fine and/or gross motor skills.

An occupational therapist will work with your child to develop these skills. Fine motor skills include things like handwriting, fastening buttons and using scissors. Gross motor skills include things like climbing stairs, throwing a ball and riding a bike.

When should I see a healthcare provider?

If you or your child have a sensory processing disorder, you’ll likely need to see an occupational therapist regularly to receive ongoing therapy. As children age, their environments and learning challenges change, so their therapy may need to change as well.

What questions should I ask my doctor?

It may be helpful to ask your healthcare provider the following questions:

What does therapy look like for SPD?
What can I do at home to help SPD?
What can I expect for my (or my child’s) future?
Can you help me find out if my insurance will cover SPD therapy?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have a sensory processing disorder?

It can be daunting to live with sensory processing disorder — whether you’re a child or an adult. It can also be challenging for loved ones. But the good news is that therapy can help you or your child cope with sensory issues.

SPD affects each person differently, so being adaptable and understanding is essential. If your child has SPD, it’s important to advocate for them to ensure they get the best care. Advocating for care — and accommodations at school — can help them have the best possible quality of life.

You and your family may also want to consider joining a support group to meet others who can relate to your experiences.

Without proper care, unmanaged SPD increases your child’s risk of depression, behavioral issues and social isolation.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
We all experience the world around us differently. Many people don’t think about all the sensory information they experience at any given time. But for people with sensory processing disorder (SPD), it can make everyday life challenging.

The more you learn about SPD, the more you can understand how your child experiences their environment and what their triggers are. And you may be able to connect with them in a way you hadn’t been able to before.

Know that occupational therapists can help you or your child adapt to and cope with sensory issues. They know that SPD affects everyone differently and will tailor a therapy plan unique to you or your child.
