Silicosis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22622-silicosis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of silicosis?

The main silicosis symptoms include:

Long-lasting (persistent) cough, especially coughing up phlegm
Inflammation in your lung tissue
Scarring in your lung tissue (pulmonary fibrosis)

These symptoms can also cause:

Fatigue
Muscle weakness
Shortness of breath
Unexplained weight loss
What is the main cause of silicosis?

Damage to your lungs from breathing in silica dust causes silicosis. This usually happens in a work-related setting.

Risk factors

Silicosis is a work-related lung disease. You’re at greater risk of developing silicosis if you work in the following industries:

Construction, building and demolition
Foundry work
Mining and quarrying
Pottery, ceramics and glassmaking
Sandblasting
Stone work, including making stone countertops
What are the long-term effects of silicosis?

People who have silicosis are at an increased risk of the following:

Autoimmune diseases like scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis and lupus
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Lung cancer
Tuberculosis and other lung infections

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose silicosis

A healthcare provider will:

Review your medical history
Ask about your symptoms
Perform a physical exam, including listening to your lungs with a stethoscope (auscultation)

They may also ask about your job history. If they suspect silicosis or another lung condition, they’ll recommend additional testing.

Tests that are used

Healthcare providers may recommend the following tests to help diagnose silicosis:

Bronchoalveolar lavage: This test “washes” your lungs and examines the fluid they pull out.
Imaging tests: Chest X-rays and CT scans can provide detailed images of your lungs.
Lab tests: Lab tests can’t diagnose silicosis. But they can help providers rule out other conditions, like some types of infections. One test may include a tuberculosis skin test.
Lung biopsy: Providers remove a small piece of your lung tissue for examination. Providers rarely recommend a lung biopsy to help diagnose silicosis.
Pulmonary function tests: These tests evaluate how well your lungs work.
Sputum culture: A sputum culture examines mucus that you cough up.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Can lungs recover from silica dust?

No. There’s no cure for silicosis. Healthcare providers can’t reverse lung damage from silica dust. They can only help manage your symptoms.

What are the treatment options for silicosis?

You can’t treat silicosis. But you can help manage your symptoms by:

Changing jobs
Doing pulmonary rehab
Quitting smoking, vaping and using tobacco products
Taking a bronchodilator to improve airflow
Using supplemental oxygen

In severe cases, healthcare providers may recommend a lung transplant.

Are there silicosis clinical trials?

Yes, there are ongoing clinical trials for silicosis treatments. Researchers use antifibrotic drugs to treat some forms of silicosis. Some of these drugs are experimental. But one drug — nintedanib (OFEV®) — has approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat pulmonary fibrosis.

If your healthcare providers think you’re a good candidate, they may suggest that you participate.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should have regular checkups with a healthcare provider if you work around silica dust. Schedule an appointment right away if you have a cough or trouble breathing.

Call a provider right away if you have silicosis and notice new symptoms that concern you.

During your appointment, you may wish to ask your provider:

Will my condition get worse?
What can I do to feel better?
How can I protect my lungs?
Am I a good candidate for a silicosis clinical trial?
Can you recommend a silicosis support group?
Do I need to think about a lung transplant, and what does this process look like?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have silicosis?

Your outlook depends on many factors, including:

How much silica you’ve been exposed to
How long you’ve been exposed to silica dust
Whether you’re still exposed to silica dust
Your age
Any other conditions you may have

Your healthcare providers will give you a better idea of what to expect, according to your situation. But in general, your outlook is better if your symptoms don’t get worse.

If silicosis causes progressive massive fibrosis, your outlook is poor. You’re more likely to have permanent breathing problems and a reduced quality of life. It’s also more likely to cause premature death.

What is the life expectancy?

It depends on the severity of your condition, your age and your overall health. Some people can live 10-20 years or longer after receiving a silicosis diagnosis. Your healthcare provider will give you a better idea of what to expect.

Prevention
----------
Can silicosis be prevented?

Yes, you can prevent silicosis. If you work around respirable crystalline silica dust, you can help lower your risk of developing silicosis by:

Changing out of dusty clothes
Making sure job sites have air-monitoring equipment
Using equipment that helps reduce the amount of dust in the air, including exhaust ventilation, dust-collecting systems, spraying water on surfaces and using “wet drills” to keep dust down
Using vacuums with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters or wet mops to clean worksites instead of a dry broom
Wearing the proper PPE, including a tight-fitting respirator

It’s also a good idea to get regular silicosis screenings through your employer. Screenings are tests that check for signs of silicosis before you have symptoms. Early detection is key to preventing severe symptoms.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is silicosis the same as cancer?

No, silicosis isn’t cancer. It doesn’t cause your cells to grow out of control. But silicosis may be a factor in developing lung cancer.

Can exercise help?

Exercise may be helpful if you have silicosis. Discuss your exercise plans with a healthcare provider. They may suggest pulmonary rehab, which includes exercises that can help improve your breathing.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
It’s common to write off a cough and other symptoms of silicosis as a common respiratory infection. But if you work around silica and have symptoms, it’s a good idea to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider to figure out exactly what’s going on with your respiratory system.

There’s no cure for silicosis. Some cases are mild while others are very serious. Only a provider can tell you what to expect in your specific situation. They’ll work with you to create a plan to manage your symptoms and protect your airways from further damage.
