Smoke Inhalation
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/smoke-inhalation

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of smoke inhalation injury

Symptoms of smoke inhalation injuries include:

Shortness of breath
Hoarseness
Chest pain
Sore throat
Cough
Noisy breathing, like wheezing or stridor
Headache
Dizziness
Confusion
Fainting
Seizures

Even small amounts of smoke can sting your eyes, irritate your sinuses and throat, or cause an asthma attack.

What happens if you breathe in a lot of smoke?

There are three main ways smoke inhalation can hurt you:

Heat can damage your upper airways.
Chemicals from toxic gases, vapors and fumes can irritate and cause inflammation in your lower airways and lungs.
Carbon monoxide, cyanide and other chemicals can prevent oxygen from getting to your tissues and cause organ damage.
Complications of smoke inhalation

Smoke inhalation can quickly lead to life-threatening complications, including:

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a type of respiratory failure caused by fluid buildup in your lungs
Asphyxiation, when your body doesn’t get enough oxygen
Coma, a long period of unconsciousness
Heart attack, lack of blood flow to your heart
Methemoglobinemia, a blood disorder that prevents you from getting enough oxygen to your tissues
Pneumonitis, inflammation in your lungs
Pulmonary edema, fluid in your lungs
Stroke, lack of blood flow to your brain
Risk factors

Breathing in a lot of smoke isn’t good for anyone. But small amounts of smoke are more likely to cause health problems if you have chronic conditions, including:

Asthma
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
COPD
Diabetes
Heart disease

Women who are pregnant and children are also at higher risk.

How to lower your risk

Keep an eye on air quality alerts to know if there are high levels of smoke or other pollutants in your area. They’re included on most weather reporting services. On days when the air quality is less than healthy, you can protect yourself by:

Staying indoors with the windows closed (turn the air conditioner on if you have one, as it filters the air it brings in)
Using a HEPA (high-efficiency particulate air) filter in your home
Wearing a well-fitted respirator mask if you can’t avoid going outdoors

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose smoke inhalation injuries

Healthcare providers diagnose smoke inhalation injuries based on your symptoms and tests. These could include:

Pulse oximetry, a small device on your finger that measures your blood oxygen level
Blood tests
Chest X-rays or CT scans
Pulmonary function tests
Arterial blood gas
Bronchoscopy

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is smoke inhalation treated?

If you’ve been in a fire or around a lot of smoke, the first step is to get to fresh air as soon as possible. Emergency treatment could include:

Supplemental oxygen and sometimes, hyperbaric oxygen therapy to deliver additional oxygen to your lungs
Bronchodilators to open up your airways
Mucolytics to break up mucus
Anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs)
Hydroxocobalamin (a form of vitamin B12) for cyanide poisoning
Methylene blue for methemoglobinemia
Intubation and mechanical ventilation if you can’t breathe on your own
What should I do if I inhaled smoke?

Seek emergency medical care if you’ve been in a fire or inhaled a lot of smoke — even if you feel OK. Quick treatment can save your life.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
How long does it take to recover from smoke inhalation?

Depending on how severe your injuries are, it can take a few weeks to recover from smoke inhalation. Healthcare providers will need to monitor you in the hospital until you can safely recover at home.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Smoke inhalation shouldn’t be treated lightly. You might feel like it’s too much of a fuss to have a doctor look you over, but the effects of breathing in smoke can be deadly. A healthcare provider can check for any concerns, treat you if needed and get you home with peace of mind.
