Soft Tissue Sarcoma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21732-soft-tissue-sarcoma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of soft tissue sarcoma?

Most soft tissue sarcomas grow very slowly. You can have one for months or years before you have symptoms. You should contact a healthcare provider if you have:

A new lump or a fast-growing lump anywhere on your body
A lump that starts to hurt
Belly pain that gets worse
Blood in your poop or poop that appears black
Nausea and vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
Soft tissue sarcoma causes

Experts don’t know the exact cause. Genetic mutations cause some soft tissue sarcomas. There are also inherited disorders and activities that increase your risk of having this condition. For example, some inherited disorders can increase your risk, including:

Gardner syndrome
Hereditary retinoblastoma
Li Fraumeni syndrome
Lynch syndrome
Maffucci syndrome
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Recklinghausen disease)

Other risk factors include:

Receiving radiation therapy
Experiencing lymphedema in your arms or legs for a long time
Having exposure to chemicals, including thorium dioxide, arsenic or vinyl chloride

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose soft tissue sarcoma

A healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. They’ll examine any unusual lumps or bumps that they can see and feel. They’ll do a physical exam to look for other symptoms. They may do the following imaging tests:

X-ray
CT scan
MRI
PET scan

Your provider may refer you to a surgical oncologist if imaging tests detect cancer. Your surgical oncologist may do a biopsy to get a small amount of tissue.

A medical pathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope. They may do several tests to identify the sarcoma type, stage and grade. Tumor grade is how pathologists find out if a tumor is likely to grow slowly, fast or spread.

What are the stages?

Healthcare providers use cancer staging systems to develop treatment plans and prognoses (what you can expect if you have soft tissue sarcoma). They consider the following factors in staging soft tissue sarcoma:

Tumor size and location
If the tumor is spreading to other areas of your body
Tumor grade (this is how pathologists determine if a tumor is likely to grow and/or spread)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is soft tissue sarcoma treated?

The most common treatment is surgery to remove a cancerous tumor. Your surgical oncologist may work with a medical oncologist. That provider may do additional treatments like:

Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
Targeted therapy
Radiation therapy

You may want to consider participating in a clinical trial. Soft tissue sarcoma is a rare kind of cancer. Researchers are investigating new ways to treat it. Participating in a clinical trial may be a way to benefit from newer treatments. Ask your provider if seeking a clinical trial makes sense in your situation.

Is there a cure?

Surgery that removes soft tissue sarcoma before it spreads may cure the disease. But soft tissue sarcoma can come back after surgery and other kinds of treatments.

When should I seek care?

You should contact your healthcare team if you experience the following symptoms after your surgery:

An opening in the incision line (the line may get deeper, longer or wider)
Fever (greater than 101 degrees Fahrenheit or 38.4 degrees Celsius)
Pain when you touch the wound or the area around the incision
Skin discoloration that goes beyond the edge of the incision
Thick, cloudy, white- or cream-colored discharge from the incision (cut)

And talk to your care team if treatment side effects are more severe than you expect. They may recommend palliative care. This is specialized care. Palliative care providers can work with you to ease treatment side effects.

Will I need follow-up care?

Yes. Some types of soft tissue sarcoma come back. Your healthcare provider may recommend regular follow-up tests. They may do these tests for the first two to three years after you finish treatment.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the life expectancy of someone with soft tissue sarcoma?

Life expectancy is how long you’ll live with soft tissue sarcoma. Your care team can’t predict that. But they may offer to explain soft tissue sarcoma survival rates.

Cancer survival rates are estimates based on the experiences of people who have cancer. The estimates are presented as the percentage of people who are alive five years after their cancer diagnosis.

The National Cancer Institute tracks cancer survival rates based on how far cancer has spread at diagnosis. Here are estimated survival rates for people who have soft tissue sarcoma:

Cancer location at diagnosis	Five-year survival rate
Localized (cancer hasn’t spread from where it started)	83%
Regional (there’s cancer in nearby lymph nodes)	60%
Distant (cancer has spread to more distant parts of your body)	17%

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Having a rare cancer like soft tissue sarcoma may make you feel as if you’re on an unfamiliar road. You don’t have a map and there’s no one around to point you in the right direction.

Your healthcare team will understand if you have many questions and concerns. They’ll do everything they can to help you find answers. They’ll explain your diagnosis in terms you understand. They’ll also outline treatment options. This information will help you feel confident about treatment decisions. It can also help plan the steps you’ll take after treatment.
