Stable Angina
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21847-stable-angina

Overview
--------
What is stable angina?

Stable angina is a type of chest pain or discomfort that’s short in duration (around five minutes) and consistent in how it feels each time it occurs. It happens when your heart muscle needs more oxygen than usual but isn’t getting it at that moment because of heart disease. Episodes come and go in predictable patterns. For example, they may occur when you’re moving around.

Stable angina is a symptom of coronary artery disease (CAD). This means there’s a sticky substance called plaque in the arteries that supply oxygen-rich blood to your heart. This plaque narrows your arteries and makes it harder for blood (and oxygen) to flow through.

Rest and medicine can stop an episode of stable angina. But this symptom is still serious and potentially dangerous. That’s because it can get worse or become unstable over time. In other words, it can progress to a complete blockage, causing permanent heart damage (a heart attack). For example, episodes might last longer or occur at times you can’t predict — even while you’re resting. Or you may need more doses of medicine to make the pain go away.

Stable angina is your heart’s way of telling you it needs your attention. Without treatment for CAD, you’re at risk of a heart attack. Your healthcare provider may recommend medicines, procedures and changes to your daily habits to help protect your heart.

What does stable angina feel like?

Stable angina causes chest pain or discomfort that may feel like pressure, heaviness, squeezing, burning or indigestion. The discomfort may spread from your chest to your left shoulder, left arm or other nearby areas.

You may also have symptoms like:

Shortness of breath
Dizziness
Nausea
Fatigue

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
(Not available)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
(Not available)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
(Not available)

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is stable angina dangerous?

Stable angina can be dangerous, but it’s mostly a warning sign that you could be at risk of a heart attack. You probably need to make some lifestyle changes.

Can stable angina lead to a heart attack?

Yes, if you have stable angina, you could have a heart attack in the future if you don’t reduce your risk.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Stable angina is common and treatable. But that doesn’t mean it’s easy to live with this symptom of heart disease. If you’re feeling stressed or anxious, talk to your provider. They can help you find ways to worry less while making changes to support your heart.

It may also help to connect with others who are living with angina. Sharing experiences and advice can help you feel supported and part of a larger community.
