Symbrachydactyly (Short, Joined Fingers)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/23189-symbrachydactyly

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symbrachydactyly symptoms

Your child’s symptoms may vary depending on the type of symbrachydactyly that they have. For example, your child’s forearm may be shorter than their other forearm. But all children with this condition have fingers that are shorter than usual. They often have missing fingers and thumbs.

Symbrachydactyly causes

There’s no known cause of symbrachydactyly. Some experts think it may happen during development when blood stops flowing to a fetus’s arm. Arm bones start as small buds or bumps that extend from a fetus’s body. The buds or bumps need a steady flow of blood to grow and become a fully formed arm and hand. Without blood flow, a fetus’s arm, fingers or thumb may not develop normally.

How doctors diagnose symbrachydactyly

A pediatrician will examine your baby’s hand. They’ll identify specific issues with your baby’s hand or fingers. They’ll use that information to diagnose the type of symbrachydactyly that your baby has. Your child’s pediatrician may do X-rays of your child’s hand. The X-ray results will help them plan treatment.

Your child’s pediatrician may classify your child’s condition as being mild, moderate or severe:

Mild symbrachydactyly means your child has slightly short fingers. They may have small amounts of webbing (skin) that connects their fingers. Their hand or forearm may be shorter than their other hand or forearm.
Moderate symbrachydactyly is when most or all the finger bones in your child’s hand are missing. Their fingers appear as small stumps. Their thumb may be shorter than usual.
Severe symbrachydactyly means your child’s hand is missing fingers. They may have a partial thumb or no thumb.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
(Not available)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Treatment for symbrachydactyly

The goal of symbrachydactyly treatment is to help your child use their hand as much as possible. Your child may have surgery to fix issues that make their hands look different. Other treatment options are:

Physical therapy to strengthen your child’s arm and hand and help them move their hand more easily
Occupational therapy to help your child learn ways to manage daily activities
Splints to support their hand
Protheses to replace missing fingers and thumbs

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if my child has symbrachydactyly?

This condition won’t affect your child’s overall growth and development. But having symbrachydactyly makes them different from other children. And having a child with this condition can make you different from other parents. You and your child may feel like you’re on your own to manage how symbrachydactyly changes your lives.

If that’s your situation, ask your child’s care team about support groups for children with congenital hand differences. Those connections may help you and your child feel less isolated.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Every child is unique. If your child has symbrachydactyly, they’re unique in ways that are different from other children. They have very short fingers or are missing fingers and their thumb, and may need surgery and other treatment.

They may also need extra support as they grow up and learn to live with symbrachydactyly. Your child’s care team will understand the unique challenges this condition often creates. They’ll recommend treatments that are right for your child. Just as important, they’ll be there for you and your child from diagnosis and beyond.

Medically Reviewed

Last reviewed on 06/10/2022.

Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.

References
