Waldenström Macroglobulinemia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17951-waldenstrom-macroglobulinemia

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Waldenström macroglobulinemia

One in 4 people diagnosed with WM don’t have symptoms. They learn they have this condition while visiting their healthcare provider for other reasons. When WM does cause symptoms, they come on slowly. Symptoms include:

Weakness and fatigue
Fever
Loss of appetite
Night sweats
Weight loss
Confusion
Enlarged liver, spleen or lymph nodes
Signs of peripheral neuropathy (tingling sensation in your fingers and toes)
Signs of thickened blood (nosebleeds, bleeding gums, dizziness, headaches and blurred vision)
Waldenström macroglobulinemia causes

Genetic mutations cause Waldenström macroglobulinemia. More than 90% of people (9 out of 10) with WM have a mutation involving the MYD88 gene. And about 40% (4 out of 10) have changes to their CXCR4 gene. Both mutations help the abnormal cells in Waldenström macroglobulinemia multiply.

These changes aren’t inherited (hereditary). This means you can’t pass this on to your children, and you didn’t get it from your parents. Instead, they develop during your lifetime. But researchers don’t know what triggers the mutations in the first place.

Risk factors

Factors that may increase your chance of developing Waldenström macroglobulinemia include your:

Age. Most people diagnosed are 65 and older.
Race. WM is most common in people who are white.
Sex. Males are more likely to have WM.
Medical history. Having hepatitis C, AIDS, Sjögren's Syndrome or MGUS may increase your risk. MGUS is a precursor for WM. But just because you have MGUS doesn’t mean that you’ll develop WM.
Family’s medical history. Having biological family members who have WM or other kinds of lymphoma may increase your risk.
Complications of this condition

In severe cases, WM can cause complications, including:

Amyloidosis. This condition happens when faulty proteins build up in organs like your heart, lungs and kidneys.
Cryoglobulinemia. This condition happens when certain blood proteins that react to cold conditions gather in clumps in your hands and feet. This can cause pain and turn your hands and feet blue or white (cyanosis).

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How do doctors diagnose this condition?

Your healthcare provider may use several tests to diagnose Waldenström macroglobulinemia. They look for cancer cells and IgM proteins. Tests include:

Blood and urine tests. Providers examine blood and urine samples for signs of WM. Signs include low blood cell counts and abnormal IgM proteins.
Imaging tests. Tests like a CT scan or a combined CT and PET scan (CT-PET) can show signs of WM inside your body. Providers look for things like enlarged organs or lymph nodes.
Eye exam. This test can check for bleeding in the back of your eyeball. This is a sign of thickened blood.
Bone marrow biopsy. Providers examine bone marrow samples under a microscope to see if there are cancer cells.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is Waldenström macroglobulinemia treated?

As there isn’t a cure for this condition, the best treatment is one that relieves symptoms with the least amount of side effects. Your healthcare provider will work with you to customize treatment. Options for WM include:

Watchful waiting. Your provider may not start treatment if you don’t have symptoms. Some people with WM don’t need treatment for years.
Plasmapheresis (plasma exchange). Providers use a machine to filter abnormal IgM from your plasma, the liquid part of your blood. They return the plasma to your bloodstream. Providers use this treatment to ease symptoms caused by thickening blood.
Immunotherapy. This treatment uses your body’s immune system to destroy or slow the growth of WM cells. Providers commonly prescribe rituximab (Rituxan®) alone or with chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy. Your providers may prescribe cancer-killing medications alone or in combination with immunotherapy.
Corticosteroids. You may take a steroid, like dexamethasone, along with immunotherapy and chemo. This treatment fights cancer and reduces the side effects of treatment.
Targeted therapy. This treatment blocks proteins that cancer cells use to make more copies. Ibrutinib (Imbruvica®) and zanubrutinib (Brukinsa®) are both targeted therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat WM.
Stem cell transplant. Providers replace bone marrow affected by abnormal cells with healthy bone marrow. This is uncommon and used only in select people.
When should I seek care?

Contact your healthcare provider if you’ve been diagnosed with WM and have a symptom that’s new or bothering you. If you learn you have this condition, it’s important to ask questions so you know what to expect. Here are a few questions you may want to ask your provider:

How serious is WM, and how will it affect my life?
What should I expect in the short term and long term?
Do I need treatment right away?
What type of treatment do you recommend?
What treatment side effects should I expect?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Everyone’s situation is different, particularly with a condition that progresses slowly like Waldenström macroglobulinemia. Research shows that 66% of people (more than 2 out of 3) are alive 10 years after they’re diagnosed. But life expectancy varies by age. Many people diagnosed over age 65 (the most commonly diagnosed age group) die from causes unrelated to WM.

Your prognosis (likely outcome) depends on lots of factors, including your:

Age
Blood test results
Mutation type (not having an MYD88 mutation sometimes suggests a worse outcome)

If you have questions about your situation, talk to your healthcare provider. They know you and the circumstances that may affect your health.

Is there anything I can do to feel better?

Living with a lymphoma like Waldenström macroglobulinemia often requires major life adjustments. It’s important to take advantage of every resource you can. Talk with your healthcare provider about what foods to eat and what activities will promote self-care.

Reach out to others with rare conditions to combat possible feelings of isolation. You’re not alone in your diagnosis — even if it feels like it at first. Ask your provider to connect you with support groups.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Researchers haven’t discovered a cure for Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) yet. But they’ve found several treatments that can make living with it more manageable. Many people live with this condition for years without symptoms. Treatments are helping people with WM live longer than ever without sacrificing their quality of life. If you receive this diagnosis, ask your healthcare provider about your short-term and long-term outlook. They can help you decide on the best care plan.
