Infected Eczema
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/infected-eczema

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
Infected eczema occurs when bacteria, fungi or viruses enter your skin during an eczema flare-up. Eczema weakens your skin’s protective barriers, making it itchy, dry, flaky and bumpy. Because the barrier isn’t as strong as it should be, harmful microbes (microscopic particles) can get in and cause an infection.

Infected eczema requires treatment and won’t go away on its own.

Types of infected eczema

There are three categories of infections that you can get if you have eczema:

Bacterial infection. Bacteria that enter your body cause a bacterial infection. A common example is a staph infection.
Fungal infection. Fungi live on your skin naturally and in your environment. An overgrowth can lead to infections like yeast infections (candida) or tinea versicolor.
Viral infection. A viral infection is a contagious microbe that spreads through physical contact with someone who already has the virus. A common example is the herpes simplex virus (eczema herpeticum).

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of infected eczema

Symptoms of an infection include the following on or around an eczema patch:

A yellow, crusty texture
Blisters
Bumps or sores that ooze
Pain (burning sensation)
Severe itching
Skin discoloration
Swelling

You may have a fever, chills or nausea with an infection. If you notice these symptoms, contact your provider. 

Infected eczema causes

Bacteria, fungi or viruses can cause infections. Eczema weakens your skin’s protective barrier by damaging your skin’s outer layer (epidermis). The severe itchiness of eczema leads to scratching that causes breaks in your skin’s barrier. These make it harder to keep harmful microbes out of your body.

How to lower your risk of infected eczema

You can reduce your risk of developing an infection at home by:

Washing your hands often with soap and water
Moisturizing your skin regularly, especially after washing or bathing
Avoiding scratching your skin
Steering clear of other people with infections
Cleaning and covering sores or broken skin with a bandage
Can eczema turn into sepsis?

Yes, severe and untreated bacterial eczema infections can turn into sepsis. This happens when the infection spreads through your bloodstream and triggers an immune response. It can affect the function of your vital organs. Sepsis can be life-threatening. This is why it’s crucial to see your healthcare provider for treatment if you have an infection. Early treatment can prevent complications and keep the infection from becoming serious.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose infected eczema

Your doctor or provider will diagnose infected eczema through a physical exam and a review of your symptoms. They’ll also take a complete medical history. Additional tests might be necessary to find out what caused your infection so your provider can offer the best treatment. These tests may include:

Bacteria, viral or fungal culture test. They’ll take a small sample of blood, urine or a swab over your affected skin to test for causes of an infection.
KOH preparation. They’ll scrape a small sample of tissue from your affected skin to examine under a microscope.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you treat infected eczema?

Infected eczema won’t heal on its own. A healthcare provider may offer one of the following treatment options, depending on the cause of the infection:

Topical or oral antibiotics for bacterial infections
Topical or oral antifungal medications for fungal infections
Oral antivirals or antivirals given through an IV into your vein (intravenously) for serious viral infections

Oral medications are pills you take by mouth. Topical medications are creams or ointments that you apply to your skin. You should use your medications as prescribed, even if you feel better.

There may be side effects from the medications that your provider gives you. They’ll go over these before you start taking the medication. Let your provider know if you have any questions.

How long does it take for infected eczema to heal?

After you start treatment, it could take several days before your skin starts to heal. Your skin should clear up after one to two weeks.

If your symptoms get worse or don’t improve after a couple of weeks, contact your provider.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have symptoms of an infection, contact your provider immediately. Infections won’t go away without medical treatment.

Visit the emergency room if you have a high fever, severe pain and swelling or any other concerning symptoms surrounding an infection.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have infected eczema?

Infected eczema needs treatment. Your provider will diagnose the cause of your infection and offer medication to clear it up. It could take up to two weeks before your symptoms go away completely. You might still have eczema symptoms after the infection clears. You should continue your baseline skin care routine.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Can I get an infection if I have weeping eczema?

Yes. Weeping eczema causes fluid-filled blisters to form on your skin. These blisters can easily break open and ooze a clear to yellow fluid. This is where they get the name “weeping.” The broken blisters create an opening for microbes to enter your skin. 

To prevent an infection in weeping eczema, clean your skin with soap and water often. Then, cover your blisters with a bandage. It’s important to avoid scratching your skin. This can create a larger opening for microbes to enter your body.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You’re surrounded by microbes. But the ones that cause infections aren’t welcome guests. Itchy eczema flare-ups create the perfect environment for bacteria, viruses and fungi to settle in — but they don’t have to stay. A healthcare provider can help treat infections fast, relieving discomfort so you can get back to your normal routine. They can also help you manage persistent eczema symptoms to keep future infections at bay.
