Mast Cell Activation Syndrome
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/mast-cell-activation-syndrome

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS)?

MCAS causes repeated episodes of severe symptoms in multiple areas of your body. Symptoms may include:

Low blood pressure
Flushing (hot, red or pink skin)
Itchy skin
Hives
Nasal congestion
Swelling, often of your face, lips, eyes, tongue or throat (angioedema)
Constipation or diarrhea (sometimes alternating)
Abdominal (belly) pain
Vomiting
Shortness of breath
Weakness or fainting
Anaphylaxis (severe allergic reaction, which may include a combination of the above symptoms)

To be considered MCAS, the symptoms must affect two or more body systems. These include your:

Skin
Respiratory system (lungs and airways)
Cardiovascular system (heart and blood vessels)
Digestive system (GI tract — stomach and intestines)
What does a mast cell flare feel like?

If you’ve ever had an allergic reaction, you know what mast cell activation feels like. But for people with MCAS, episodes are often more severe than typical allergic reactions, and they involve multiple parts of the body. Your skin might get swollen and red, itch or break out in hives. You might get diarrhea or vomit. In extreme cases, the reaction is so severe that it can cause potentially life-threatening symptoms. Call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to the nearest emergency room if you’re experiencing severe symptoms.

What causes mast cell activation syndrome?

Your mast cells reacting when they shouldn’t causes MCAS. Mast cells release proteins that cause your symptoms when they think they need to protect you from something harmful that’s entered your body. With allergies, you can identify something specific that causes your body to overreact. In MCAS, there doesn’t seem to be a clear trigger that causes your mast cells to release proteins.

No one’s really sure what causes your mast cells to get sensitive to things they shouldn’t be.

What can trigger it?

While many things can trigger mast cells to activate and release histamine (like food or pollen allergies), MCAS causes severe symptoms that aren’t predictably triggered by anything specific. You might find that you’re more likely to have episodes when you’re experiencing changes in your life or environment, like periods of high stress or shifting weather. If you find that episodes only happen after exposure to something specific, it’s not likely that you have MCAS.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS) diagnosed?

A healthcare provider might think you have mast cell activation syndrome based on a physical exam, discussion of your symptoms and your medical history. Providers diagnose mast cell activation syndrome if you:

Have symptoms of mast cell activation
Respond to treatment for mast cell activation
Have signs of mast cell activation on testing
MCAS testing

To test for MCAS, your provider may order a blood test to look for a sign of mast cell activation called tryptase. You have to get tested multiple times to check your levels, both when feeling well and when you’re having an episode. Keep in mind that tryptase can be elevated in other conditions, so tryptase levels alone don’t indicate MCAS. Some people naturally have higher-than-expected tryptase levels without symptoms.

Your provider may also do an allergy skin test or allergy blood tests to rule out other causes of your symptoms.

Healthcare providers don’t diagnose mast cell activation syndrome based on a histamine blood test. Elevated histamine levels don’t mean you have MCAS.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS) treated?

Providers use treatment to both diagnose MCAS and reduce your symptoms. If you don’t improve after treatment with mast cell-targeted medications, you probably don’t have MCAS.

Depending on your symptoms, your provider might prescribe:

Histamine type 1 receptor blockers (antihistamines): These can treat allergy symptoms and include loratadine, cetirizine and fexofenadine.
Histamine type 2 receptor blockers (antihistamines that reduce stomach acid): These can treat nausea and stomach pain and include ranitidine or famotidine.
Aspirin: Aspirin can reduce flushing.
Leukotriene modifiers: These can help you breathe better and include montelukast and zafirlukast.
Omalizumab (XOLAIR®): This can reduce anaphylactic episodes.
Epinephrine: Providers use epinephrine to stop anaphylaxis. You can carry an epinephrine injector (EpiPen®, Auvi-Q®) with you in case you have an anaphylactic episode.
Mast cell stabilizers: Medications like cromolyn sodium prevent mast cells from releasing mediators (degranulation).
Corticosteroids: These reduce inflammation and can open up your airways and reduce fluid in your tissues. Due to the risk of side effects, providers don’t often prescribe steroids for MCAS.
How do I take care of myself?

Ways to take care of yourself with MCAS include:

Keep a journal of your symptoms. Include information about what your symptoms were and anything you can remember about what you ate or were exposed to at the time. Think about anything that might be different about those times compared to when you haven’t had episodes. Let your provider know if you see any patterns.
Let close friends and relatives — or anyone who’s around you a lot — know what an attack looks like and where to find your epinephrine injector or other emergency medicine.
When should I go to the ER?

Severe reactions due to MCAS are rare. But if you have symptoms of a serious allergic reaction or anaphylaxis and you have an epinephrine injector, use it. Then, call 911 (or your local emergency service number) or go to the nearest emergency room. Symptoms of anaphylaxis may include:

Swelling of your face, lips, tongue or throat
Trouble breathing or swallowing
Loss of consciousness
Low blood pressure
What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

It might be helpful to ask your healthcare provider:

What should I do if I have an episode/flare-up?
How do I take my medication?
How and when do I use my epinephrine injector?
When should I go to the ER?
When should I follow up with you?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
Does it ever go away?

No, there’s no cure for MCAS. If you have MCAS, you’ll need to manage it with medications.

What’s the life expectancy of someone with mast cell activation syndrome?

Providers expect that most people with MCAS live as long as someone without it. But it’s a newly recognized condition, so we can’t know for sure how it impacts life expectancy.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is mast cell activation an autoimmune disorder?

No, MCAS isn’t an autoimmune disorder.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Sirens are going off. Security’s on its way. Your mast cells have detected danger and have signaled for help. Except…there is no danger. Like an obnoxious prankster, your mast cells keep pulling the alarm when there’s no emergency. Instead of preventing you from getting sick, they’re the ones making you sick.

MCAS is rare. In most cases, other conditions are causing the symptoms. It’s important to talk to a provider to make sure you get the correct diagnosis.

Medically Reviewed

Last reviewed on 07/11/2024.

Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.

References
