Meningococcal Disease
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22442-meningococcal-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of meningococcal disease?

Common symptoms of meningococcal disease include:

Being bothered by bright light
Diarrhea
Fever
Headache
Nausea and vomiting
Skin rash that looks like dark, discolored pinpoints or a bigger area that looks like a bruise
Stiff neck

Other signs that you may have meningococcal disease include:

Confusion and irritability
Feeling very sleepy
Difficulty walking or staying upright
Grunting and moaning
Joint pain and muscle pain
Loss of appetite
What are symptoms in babies?

It can be difficult to notice meningococcal disease symptoms in babies and young children. They may even be different from symptoms in older children or adults. Common symptoms include:

Being irritable for no reason
Being twitchy or floppy
Being very tired
A bulging soft spot in their skull
Refusing to eat
How do people get meningococcal disease?

Meningococcal disease spreads from person to person, usually through close contact with someone who has it. It spreads through spit or mucus through activities like:

Coughing
Kissing
Sharing drinks or eating utensils like forks or spoons
Sneezing

N. meningitidis doesn’t live long outside of your body. It can’t survive on surfaces.

Risk factors

Anyone can get meningococcal disease. But you’re at a greater risk of developing it if you:

Are less than a year old, a teenager or an early adult, especially if you smoke or are exposed to smoke
Have a spleen injury or no spleen
Have sickle cell disease
Live in the same area as a lot of other people, like college campuses or military barracks
Take complement inhibitor medications, like eculizumab (Soliris®) and ravulizumab (Ultomiris®)
Visit areas outside of the U.S. where meningococcal disease is common, like sub-Saharan Africa
Complications of meningococcal disease

Meningococcal disease is serious. About 10 to 15 out of every 100 people who have meningococcal disease die, even with treatment.

About 1 in 5 people who survive have long-term complications, including:

Brain damage
Kidney damage
Loss of limbs
Nerve damage
Total hearing loss (deafness)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Meningococcal disease can be challenging for healthcare providers to diagnose because it shares many of the same symptoms as the common cold or flu. If a provider suspects you have meningococcal disease, they’ll recommend blood tests and a spinal tap to collect spinal fluid.

They’ll send your samples to a lab to look for bacteria and see if they grow. If N. meningitidis grows in your samples, that means you have meningococcal disease.

If providers can’t tell if you have meningococcal disease from your samples, they may order a PCR test.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

Healthcare providers treat meningococcal disease with antibiotics like ceftriaxone (Ceftrisol Plus®, Rocephin®) or penicillin. They usually give them to you through an intravenous (IV) tube they inject into a vein. If they think you have meningococcal disease, they’ll start you on antibiotics even before an official diagnosis. It’s very important to start treatment as soon as possible.

In addition to antibiotics, you may need treatments such as:

Corticosteroids to reduce damage to your nervous system
IV fluids
Medications to treat low blood pressure
Oxygen therapy
Surgery to treat dead or damaged skin
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Contact a healthcare provider immediately if you or your child has symptoms of meningococcal disease. If you have any reactions to your treatments, or if you find your symptoms getting worse, reach out again.

During your appointment, you may wish to ask the following questions:

How did I get meningococcal disease?
How severe is my case?
Do I need any other treatment besides antibiotics?
Should people I’m in close contact with see a provider for testing?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have meningococcal disease?

Meningococcal disease is very serious. It can even be fatal. Getting treatment right away is very important. But even with early treatment, it’s still possible to have complications, including permanent damage to your skin or loss of limbs. A complete recovery can take weeks or months. You’ll receive antibiotics over seven to 10 days. But it may take longer to feel better.

Unlike other types of infections, you can get meningococcal disease more than once. Healthcare providers might test your immune system if you get it again.

Prevention
----------
Can this be prevented?

Yes, you can help prevent meningococcal disease in a few different ways. They’re similar to how you might prevent other bacterial infections.

Avoiding people who are sick

Avoid close contact with people who are sick. Don’t share food or drinks. If you have to spend time around people who are sick, it’s a good idea to wear a mask over your nose and mouth. You should also wash your hands and avoid touching your eyes, nose or mouth with unclean hands.

Getting vaccinated

There are three vaccines in the U.S. that help prevent meningococcal disease:

Meningococcal conjugate (MenACWY) vaccines
Pentavalent (MenABCWY) vaccines
Serogroup B meningococcal (MenB) vaccines
Taking preventive antibiotics

If you take complement inhibitors or are in close contact with someone who has meningococcal disease, healthcare providers may suggest you also take antibiotics.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
What is the difference between meningococcal disease and meningitis?

Even though they sound the same, meningococcal disease and meningitis are different issues. N. meningitidis causes meningococcal disease. Meningitis refers to inflammation of your meninges. It can happen if you have meningococcal disease. But it can happen if you have other conditions, too. N. meningitidis doesn’t cause all cases of meningitis.

What is the difference between meningococcal disease and meningococcemia?

Meningococcemia is another condition N. meningitidis causes. It happens when the bacteria get into your bloodstream and cause an infection. It can destroy your blood vessels and keep the tissues in your body from getting oxygen.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
With symptoms like a fever and body aches, meningococcal disease can look like other less serious diseases. But it’s also rare. So how should you know when to see a healthcare provider? If you have flu-like symptoms along with a stiff neck, skin rash and/or light sensitivity, it’s time to make an appointment. The disease gets worse quickly, and getting treatment as quickly as possible is important to your recovery. You can also give yourself some peace of mind by talking to a healthcare provider about meningococcal disease vaccines. Shots aren’t fun. But some temporary discomfort is better than the serious meningococcal disease complications.
