Meningioma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17858-meningioma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of meningioma

Because meningiomas are typically slow-growing, they may not cause noticeable symptoms until they grow large enough to push on important structures around them. Symptoms can vary depending on which part of your brain it affects.

Common meningioma symptoms may include:

Headaches
Hearing loss
Loss of smell
Memory problems
Muscle weakness
Seizures
Vision changes (like bulging eyes, double vision or blurriness)
Meningioma causes

Most tumors happen because of a chromosomal deletion. This is a genetic mutation where part of a chromosome is missing. These mutations happen randomly (sporadically). Or you may inherit them as part of certain genetic conditions, like:

Cowden syndrome
Li-Fraumeni syndrome
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
Neurofibromatosis type 2
Von Hippel-Lindau disease
Risk factors for meningioma

Meningiomas can affect anyone. You may be more at risk for a meningioma if you:

Are over age 65
Are Black
Are female
Are using hormone replacement therapy and/or birth control pills
Had or have breast cancer
Underwent radiation therapy (on your head)
Have a biological relative with meningiomas

Cancerous tumors are more common in males.

Complications of meningioma

If the tumor is large and untreated, you may have the following complications:

Memory loss
Paralysis
Personality or behavioral changes
Speech difficulty
Vision loss

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose meningioma

To diagnose a meningioma, a healthcare provider will perform a physical and neurological exam. They’ll confirm with imaging tests like a CT scan or an MRI.

A meningioma can be difficult to diagnose. This is because it grows slowly and doesn’t cause symptoms until it’s bigger. Also, symptoms may resemble normal signs of aging in adults over 65.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is meningioma treated?

Treatment for meningiomas varies from person to person. It’ll likely involve a combination of the following therapies:

Observation: Your provider may use the “wait-and-see” approach if you have a small tumor with few or slow-progressing symptoms. You’ll see your provider often for follow-up visits so they can do imaging tests and monitor tumor size and symptoms.
Surgery: Surgical resection is the removal of a tumor. A total removal (gross total resection) can cure meningiomas if it’s a safe option.
Radiation therapy: This uses strong beams of energy to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing and dividing. It’s also useful in treating some noncancerous meningiomas.
Radiosurgery (Gamma Knife): This delivers a blast of radiation to help stop tumors from growing. It’s typically used for small, benign meningiomas.
Palliative care: This focuses on improving how you feel during treatment by managing symptoms and supporting you and your family.
Chemotherapy (rare): Your provider may recommend this if you develop recurrent or progressive tumors that don’t respond to surgery or radiation therapy. Bevacizumab may help treat anaplastic tumors after surgery and radiation therapy.
In-depth molecular analysis: An in-depth analysis of meningioma tissue may help find chemotherapeutic drugs that may be effective in your case. This can help better predict the likelihood of it coming back after treatment.

Meningiomas may come back after treatment (recur). Tumors are less likely to come back if your surgeon can safely remove all of them during surgery.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have meningioma and notice new or different symptoms, report the changes to your provider as soon as possible.

If you’ve completed treatment for meningioma, your care doesn’t stop there. Your provider will keep monitoring your health, checking for tumor recurrence and managing any long-term side effects during follow-up visits.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the life expectancy for meningiomas?

Your life expectancy depends on several factors, including:

Your age and overall health
The size of the tumor
The location of the tumor
If the tumor is cancerous
If surgery partially or fully removed the tumor

It varies from person to person. You should talk to your provider to learn more about what your life expectancy looks like.

What is the survival rate for meningiomas?

A survival rate is a statistic that estimates the likelihood of surviving for a set period. It’s usually five years after a cancer diagnosis. For grade II and grade III tumors, the five-year survival rate is 63.5%.

It’s important to remember that survival rates are an estimate. Your provider can give you the most accurate information based on your situation.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Receiving a brain tumor diagnosis is unsettling, regardless of whether it’s benign or cancerous. The good news is that meningiomas are treatable. Know that your care team is there to provide you with robust, individualized treatment options and support. If you have any questions or concerns, don’t be afraid to ask. They’re available to help you.
