Microdontia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/microdontia-small-teeth

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of microdontia

Unusually small teeth are the main symptom of microdontia. Additional signs and symptoms may include:

Difficulty eating
Gaps between your teeth
Misaligned bite
Pronunciation difficulties
What are tiny teeth a symptom of?

Sometimes, microdontia is a stand-alone condition. But in some cases, it may be a symptom of:

Crouzon syndrome
Down syndrome
Ectodermal dysplasia
Hypopituitarism
Incontinentia pigmenti
Microdontia causes

Several things can cause microdontia, including:

Environmental factors: Exposure to certain substances during pregnancy can affect fetal development, resulting in small teeth.
Genetics: Microdontia can run in families. It’s also more common in people with certain genetic conditions, including certain types of dwarfism.
Hormonal factors: Conditions like hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism can have an impact on tooth size and development.
Infections: Getting a severe infection during pregnancy may interfere with tooth development in the fetus.
Nutritional deficiencies: A lack of vitamins A, C and D may affect tooth development and result in microdontia.
Preterm birth: Babies who are born early may have small teeth due to incomplete dental development.

Even if one or more of the above applies to you, it doesn’t necessarily mean that you (or your child) have microdontia. To get a better understanding of your situation, talk to your healthcare provider.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose microdontia

Healthcare providers can diagnose microdontia during a physical examination or dental cleaning. They may also need to take X-rays to check the health of your tooth roots.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is microdontia treated?

Common microdontia treatments include dental procedures to make your small teeth appear larger. These treatments may include:

Bonding: A dentist applies a tooth-colored material to the affected areas. This “bulks up” your teeth.
Crowns: A dental crown (cap) covers your entire tooth. A dentist bonds it into place.
Veneers: A dental veneer is similar to a crown, but it covers the front surface of your tooth.

Dentists may use a combination of procedures to treat small teeth. Ask what they recommend in your situation.

Can braces fix microdontia?

Braces can’t fix microdontia directly, but they may be part of your treatment plan. For example, if your small teeth cause crowding, braces might be used to create space before other treatments. Ask your dentist if braces are right for you.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Tell your dentist if you develop jaw pain or notice signs of wear or tear on your teeth. If you don’t already have a dentist, ask your primary care physician for recommendations.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have microdontia?

Microdontia doesn’t always need to be fixed. If you only have one or two small teeth, you might not need treatment at all. But if the condition disrupts your quality of life, consider talking to your provider.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Having smaller-than-normal teeth isn’t something that always requires treatment. But if you have difficulty eating or speaking — or if you simply want your teeth to appear larger — talk to your dentist. They can discuss options with you and come up with a plan that fits your goals.
