Mononeuropathy
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/16014-mononeuropathy

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of mononeuropathy

Symptoms of mononeuropathy vary depending on the affected nerve. The most common symptoms are:

Numbness in the affected area
Pain or a burning sensation
A feeling of “pins and needles”
Muscle weakness in the affected area, which may result in muscle atrophy (loss of muscle bulk/size)

You should see a healthcare provider if you experience any of these symptoms.

Untreated mononeuropathy can lead to:

Chronic pain
Loss of sensation
Permanent weakness or paralysis
Mononeuropathy causes

Several situations and conditions can cause mononeuropathy, including:

Injuries
Compression
Health conditions
Injuries

Direct injury to a nerve is the most common cause of mononeuropathy. This can happen through:

Repetitive motions (repetitive strain injuries)
Overextension of a joint
Sustained forceful muscle contractions (like tightly gripping a tool)
Bone fractures that damage a nerve
Trauma to a nerve, like from a knife wound or surgery
Radiation therapy for cancer
Nerve compression

Any of the following conditions or situations can result in nerve compression (squeezing), leading to mononeuropathy:

A tumor
Excessive swelling (edema)
A poorly fitted cast
Using crutches
Prolonged cramped postures (like while you’re gardening)
Being confined to a bed or a single position
Health conditions

Certain health conditions can cause mononeuropathy, though they’re more likely to affect several nerves at once, not just one. Examples of health conditions that can cause mononeuropathy include:

Alcohol use disorder
Autoimmune and inflammatory conditions, like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis
Certain infections, like HIV and shingles
Diabetes
Vitamin and nutrient deficiencies

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is mononeuropathy diagnosed?

In most cases, healthcare providers can diagnose mononeuropathy by:

Asking about your symptoms
Reviewing your medical history
Doing a physical exam and a neurological exam

But because mononeuropathy has several possible causes, your provider may recommend additional testing if the cause isn’t obvious or if your symptoms are severe. Tests that can help confirm the diagnosis and/or find the underlying cause include:

EMG (electromyography)
Nerve conduction study
Blood tests
Imaging tests, like an ultrasound, an MRI scan or a CT scan

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What is the treatment for mononeuropathy?

Treatment for mononeuropathy depends on several factors, like:

The affected nerve
The cause
The severity
Your symptoms

Your healthcare provider will recommend treatments based on your unique situation. Some examples of treatment include:

Conservative treatment, like rest and taking medicines for pain management
Splints to immobilize the area
Steroid injections
Physical therapy
Treatment of any associated underlying medical condition
Surgery to relieve pressure if the other treatments don’t work
When should I see my healthcare provider?

It’s important to see a healthcare provider if you experience symptoms of mononeuropathy, like pain, numbness and/or muscle weakness. The sooner you can get treatment, the better the outcome.

If you have a mononeuropathy diagnosis and your symptoms get worse or change, talk to your provider.

It may be helpful to ask your provider the following questions:

What type of mononeuropathy do I have?
What caused it?
What are my treatment options? What do you recommend?
How long will it take to recover from this?
Will I have complete or partial recovery?
How can I prevent this type of mononeuropathy from happening again?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the prognosis for someone with mononeuropathy?

The prognosis (outlook) for someone with mononeuropathy varies based on several factors, like the nerve that’s affected, the underlying cause and the severity of the nerve damage.

This condition can be painful and affect your ability to do everyday tasks. Some people experience long-lasting symptoms of mononeuropathy. But if your healthcare provider can find the cause of it and treatment is successful, mononeuropathy can be temporary.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
What’s the difference between mononeuropathy and polyneuropathy?

Polyneuropathy happens when many nerves throughout your body malfunction at the same time. One example of acute (sudden) polyneuropathy is Guillain-Barré syndrome.

Mononeuropathy is damage to a single nerve in your body. Sometimes, it’s difficult for healthcare providers to distinguish multiple mononeuropathy from polyneuropathy.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You may know mononeuropathy by some of its other names, like carpal tunnel syndrome, Bell’s palsy and sciatica. It’s just a fancy name for damage to one nerve. It’s important to see a healthcare provider if you develop symptoms of this condition, like pain or numbness. The sooner you can get treatment, the better.
