Motor Neuron Disease (MND)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/motor-neuron-disease-mnd

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Motor neuron disease symptoms

MND symptoms occur gradually and may not be obvious at first. Early MND symptoms may include:

Weakness in your legs or ankles that makes it harder to climb up stairs, or causes you to trip often
Slurred speech (dysarthria)
Difficulty swallowing
Weakened grip that makes it hard to button a shirt or open a jar, or you may drop things easily
Muscle twitches and cramps
Weight loss due to your arms and legs getting thinner over time
Trouble stopping yourself from laughing or crying in inappropriate situations (pseudobulbar affect)

Other MND symptoms may include:

Breathlessness
Trouble breathing that occurs when lying down
Repeated (recurrent) chest infections
Disturbed sleep
Poor concentration and/or memory
Confusion
Morning headaches
Fatigue
Causes of MND

Problems with your motor neurons cause motor neuron diseases. These cells slowly stop functioning properly over time. Researchers don’t know why this occurs.

Some cases of MND are inherited, meaning they’re passed on through biological families. In these cases, a single genetic change causes the condition. They’re usually inherited in one of several ways:

Autosomal dominant means that you only need one copy of a changed gene from one biological parent with the disorder to be at risk of the disease.
Autosomal recessive means that you must inherit one copy of the changed gene from each parent to be at risk of the disease.
X-linked inheritance means a female parent carries the gene on one X chromosome and passes the disorder along to male children.

In non-inherited cases, different factors may play a role in the development of MND. These include viral, toxic, genetic and/or environmental factors.

Risk factors

MND most commonly affects people in their 60s and 70s, but it may also affect children and adults of all ages. You’re more likely to develop an MND if you have a close relative with the condition or a close relative with a related condition called frontotemporal dementia.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose MND

An MND diagnosis can be difficult to make in the early stages. There’s no single test for the conditions. Your healthcare provider may suspect MND if you have progressive muscle weakness without pain or loss of sensation. They may ask you questions, like:

Which body parts are affected?
When did your symptoms start?
Which symptoms appeared first?
Have the symptoms changed over time?

Your provider may request several tests to help make a diagnosis. These may include:

Electromyography (EMG). Electromyography records electrical activity in your muscles. It can help determine if the problem is in your muscles, nerves or neuromuscular junction.
Nerve conduction studies. Nerve conduction studies measure how fast nerves transmit impulses.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. A brain MRI and sometimes spinal cord MRI can check for abnormalities that may cause similar symptoms.

To help rule out other conditions, your healthcare provider may request additional tests, including:

Blood tests
Urine tests
Spinal tap (lumbar puncture)
Genetic tests

Over time, MND causes symptoms that are so characteristic that the diagnosis is obvious without any testing.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is motor neuron disease treated?

There’s no specific cure or treatment for motor neuron disease. But researchers continue to study safe and effective options to treat the condition.

You may work with a team of healthcare providers to help you manage the symptoms of the disease. Motor neuron disease treatment may include physical therapy to help you maintain your muscle strength and keep your joints flexible.

If you have swallowing difficulties, you may receive nutrition through a tube inserted through your abdominal wall into your stomach (gastrostomy tube).

Many people with MND find relief from their symptoms by taking certain medications, including:

Baclofen, to help make muscles less tight and reduce muscle spasms
Phenytoin or quinine, to help decrease muscle cramps
Glycopyrrolate, to reduce drooling
Antidepressants, to help with depression
Benzodiazepines, to help with pain as the disease progresses

In people with ALS, a couple of medications can help prolong life and slow the decline in function, including riluzole and edaravone.

Many people also participate in clinical trials.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should see a healthcare provider if you have possible early signs of MND, like muscle weakness. You may not have MND, but it’s important to get a correct diagnosis as early as possible to help get you the care and support you need.

You may also want to see a provider if you have a close relative with MND or frontotemporal dementia and you’re worried you may be at risk of the disease. Your provider may refer you to a genetic counselor to talk about your risk.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Motor neuron diseases are progressive diseases that get worse over time. It’s important that you find a healthcare provider who fully understands your condition. They can help you find appropriate treatment to help you manage your disease.

It’s also important to have a support system in place. As your condition progresses, you’ll find that you need help with more and more tasks that become difficult to do. Reach out to friends or loved ones, or ask your provider if they can provide resources for you to get support from your community. Remember, you’re not alone.

What is the life expectancy of a person with motor neuron disease?

Unfortunately, motor neuron diseases significantly shorten your life expectancy. They’re progressive diseases that’ll eventually lead to death. But how long it takes to reach that stage varies. Some people live for a few years or even decades before passing away from the effects of the diseases. Your healthcare provider can help you better understand the specifics of your prognosis (outlook).

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Getting a diagnosis of a motor neuron disease (MND) can be scary and shocking. Remember, it’s not your fault. You didn’t do anything wrong. And it doesn’t change who you are — but life may look different. Although you may experience challenges as the disease progresses, there are treatments available to help you manage its effects. Lean into your friends and loved ones for support. And if you’re struggling to cope and need more support, talk to your healthcare provider. They can help you find resources and make sure you have the help you need as time goes on.
