Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/mucoepidermoid-carcinoma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of mucoepidermoid carcinoma

MEC usually grows slowly. Sometimes, it has a sudden period of rapid growth. Symptoms include:

A lump or swelling that forms in front of your ears (where your biggest salivary gland is) or inside your mouth or jaw
Pressure or pain at the site of the lump
Drainage from your ear
Not being able to open your mouth all the way
Trouble swallowing
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma causes

As with cancer in general, MEC happens when genetic mutations (changes) cause tumors to form. But it’s not a hereditary cancer (one you’re born with).

There are no known behaviors that cause this cancer.

Risk factors

Both children and adults develop MEC. But most people get diagnosed in their 50s. Females may be slightly more at risk than males.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Your healthcare provider will review your medical history and do a physical exam. They may feel for lumps in the areas where your salivary glands are. They may feel for swelling in your lymph nodes. This may be a sign that MEC has spread there.

You may need imaging tests that show the tumor inside your body. These include an MRI, CT scan or PET scan.

The only way to confirm you have mucoepidermoid carcinoma is with a biopsy. Your provider will remove tissue or fluid from the lump and test it for cancer cells.

Grading mucoepidermoid carcinoma

An important part of diagnosis involves grading MEC. MEC grades are low, intermediate and high. The higher the grade, the more abnormal the cells look under a microscope.

High-grade MEC is more aggressive than low- and intermediate- grade MEC. It may come back after surgery. You may need more intense treatments to manage it.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

MEC treatments include:

Surgery: If possible, your healthcare provider will remove the tumor completely. They may also remove nearby lymph nodes if the cancer has spread there.
Radiation therapy: You may get radiation after surgery. This is especially the case with tumors that are high grade. This treatment destroys cancer cells that surgery may have missed.
Chemotherapy: Chemo treats advanced MEC by destroying cancer cells throughout your body. It may also make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation.
Clinical trials: Your provider may recommend you join a clinical trial. These are studies that test the safety and effectiveness of new treatments.
When should I see my healthcare provider?

See your healthcare provider if you’re unsure about what’s causing a new lump. Most of us get lumps and bumps at some point. The majority aren’t serious enough to worry about. But if you have a new lump that’s firm, immovable or that’s growing bigger, it’s time to see your provider.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Like all cancers, MEC is a serious diagnosis. You’ll need treatment and follow-up care. But your experience depends on factors your healthcare provider can explain. For example, it may be possible to cure early-stage low-grade tumors. High-grade tumors are harder to treat but still may be curable.

Factors that lead to better outcomes include:

A younger age at diagnosis (children have better outcomes than adults)
Not having cancer spread beyond the primary tumor site
Having low-grade MEC
What is the survival rate for mucoepidermoid carcinoma?

According to a recent study, about half of people with high-grade MEC are alive five years after their diagnosis. The five-year survival for low-grade MEC is 70%.

Still, it’s important to remember that these numbers provide a snapshot of the past. They don’t factor in things unique to you, like your age, health and treatment response. All of these things matter when it comes to your prognosis (outlook). This is why your provider is your best resource for explaining what your diagnosis means for your health.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Your experience of a mucoepidermoid carcinoma diagnosis depends on lots of things. High-grade tumors may require a series of cancer treatments. But for small, low-grade tumors, surgery alone may be all the treatment you need. Your response to treatment depends on things unique to you, like your age and overall health. Ask your healthcare provider how your diagnosis will shape your experience.
