Yeast Infection Under Breast
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22970-yeast-infection-under-breast

Overview
--------
What is a yeast infection under your breast?

A yeast infection under your breast is a fungal skin infection called candidiasis. A yeast called Candida causes candidiasis. Many types of yeast naturally live on your skin. In healthy people, this usually doesn’t cause any issues. But when there’s an overgrowth of Candida, the yeast can penetrate the surface of your skin, causing an infection.

Candidiasis can develop almost anywhere on the surface of your body. But it’s most frequently found in moist, warm areas of your skin, such as the skin folds under your breasts.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
A yeast infection under your breasts looks like a bright red rash.

What does a yeast infection under your breasts look like?

A yeast infection under your breasts looks like a bright red rash. The rash will appear under your breasts and at the top of your torso where your breast skin touches your chest. The breast rash may be:

Raised, swollen or tender.
Shiny.
Itchy or painful.
Burning or stinging.

The skin around the rash may be dry, flaky and cracked. The rash may produce blisters that crust over and ooze.

What causes a yeast infection under your breasts?

A yeast called Candida causes yeast infections under your breasts. Candida grows and thrives in moist, warm environments. When moisture is trapped, it can cause the surface of your skin to stick together in your skin folds. The moisture makes it easier for your skin to rub together, which can lead to a skin condition called intertrigo. Intertrigo allows Candida to overgrow, causing a yeast infection.

Conditions and other factors that can cause intertrigo or lead to yeast infections under your breasts include:

Having large breasts.
Wearing improper undergarments or tight clothing.
Not changing undergarments frequently.
Not drying the area under your breasts carefully.
Breastfeeding.
Using breast pads.
Previous vaginal yeast infection.
Hot, humid climates.
Excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis).

Yeast infections are more common in certain groups of people. This includes people who are:

Pregnant.
Overweight or have obesity.
Taking antibiotics. Antibiotics kill bacteria that normally live in or on your body.

Yeast infections are also more common in people with weakened immune systems. This may be due to conditions such as diabetes. Or it may be from the use of medications that suppress your immune system.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is a yeast infection under your breasts diagnosed?

Your healthcare provider will perform a physical examination to diagnose a yeast infection under your breasts. They may be able to diagnose a yeast infection by looking at the skin under your breasts. If you have a bright red rash, your provider may be able to tell it’s a yeast infection.

Your healthcare provider may want to collect a sample of the rash for testing. They may use a tongue depressor or scalpel to gently scrape some of the skin from the infected area. A pathologist will look at the sample under a microscope. This can help them determine the type of fungus that’s causing the infection.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is a yeast infection under your breasts treated?

Treatment for a yeast infection under your breasts may include an antifungal medication. Your healthcare provider may recommend an antifungal cream, ointment or other solution. You can buy many antifungal creams over-the-counter. Your healthcare provider may prescribe a stronger antifungal option if necessary. You can apply antifungals directly onto the infected area of your skin. Topical antifungal medications include:

Miconazole.
Nystatin.
Clotrimazole.

In some cases, your healthcare provider may recommend an antifungal medication taken by mouth. This includes medications such as fluconazole. They may also recommend a steroid cream to help relieve your symptoms.

It’s important to keep the area under your breasts clean and dry to help get rid of a yeast infection. This can also help prevent yeast infections from returning in the future. Exposing the area under your breasts to air may help. Drying powders may also help dry out your skin and prevent future yeast infections.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have a yeast infection under my breasts?

You can typically treat yeast infections under your breasts at home. You'll need an over-the-counter antifungal medication. But if the rash doesn’t go away within a couple of weeks, call your healthcare provider. You may need a stronger treatment option.

Be sure to keep the area under your breasts clean and dry to prevent future yeast infections.

How long does a yeast infection under my breasts last?

It may take a couple of weeks to get rid of a yeast infection under your breasts. After you start antifungal treatment, the rash should start to clear up within a week or two. But yeast infections can be difficult to treat. If your symptoms persist, call your healthcare provider.

Prevention
----------
How can I prevent a yeast infection under my breasts?

You can prevent a yeast infection under your breasts by keeping the area clean and dry. You can also use drying powders to prevent yeast infections. Other steps you can take to prevent yeast infections under your breasts include:

Breast pads: If you’re using disposable breast pads, make sure to use pads without waterproof liners. Change your breast pads frequently. If you’re using reusable breast pads, make sure to wash them in warm, soapy water.
Bras: Wear clean, supportive cotton bras. Change your bra at least once a day. Wash your bras in hot, soapy water. Don’t sleep in your bra.
Hand washing: Wash your hands often. Wash your hands before and after breastfeeding. Also, wash your hands before and after applying antifungal cream to your breasts.
Diet: Avoid sugary and starchy foods, and limit alcohol. Consider adding a probiotic to your diet. Losing weight may help prevent yeast infections.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Yeast infections under your breasts are common. You can typically treat them with antifungal medications. But yeast infections under your breasts can take time and patience to get rid of. If you have symptoms of a yeast infection under your breasts, see your healthcare provider. They can give you proper treatment options so you’ll be feeling better as soon as possible.
