Yellow Jacket Sting
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/yellow-jacket-sting

Overview
--------
Do yellow jackets sting?

Yes, yellow jackets sting. These yellow-and-black-striped wasps nest underground or in places like tree stumps, hollow logs and between walls. Because of their markings, many people confuse yellow jackets with honeybees. But unlike a honeybee, which can only sting you once, a yellow jacket can sting you repeatedly. Yellow jacket stings are the most common type of insect sting in the United States.

When a yellow jacket stings, its stinger pierces your skin and injects venom. For most people, yellow jacket venom causes pain, swelling and itching. But people who are allergic can develop anaphylactic symptoms like dizziness, hives, vomiting or difficulty breathing and swallowing.

If you or someone you know has a severe allergic reaction to a yellow jacket sting, call 911 immediately. If you have an EpiPen®, use it. This is a medical emergency and you need prompt care.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of a yellow jacket sting?

Specific symptoms vary from person to person. People who aren’t allergic to yellow jacket stings usually have:

Pain.
Redness.
Swelling.
Burning.
Itchiness.
Lingering tenderness.

People who are allergic to yellow jacket stings can develop anaphylaxis — a severe and potentially life-threatening allergic reaction.

Anaphylactic symptoms may include:

Wheezing.
Coughing.
Difficulty breathing.
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia).
Tightness in your throat.
Hives.
Sweating.
Anxiety.
Dizziness.
Fainting.
Nausea or vomiting.
Diarrhea.
What causes the reaction you get from a yellow jacket sting?

Yellow jackets inject a venom that contains the toxin mastoparan and the enzyme phospholipase A1. Both substances trigger your body’s inflammatory response.

The components in yellow jacket venom are different from the ones in bee venom. For this reason, people who are allergic to yellow jacket stings are rarely allergic to bee stings, and vice versa.

Yellow jacket sting complications

In addition to pain, swelling and itching, yellow jacket stings can sometimes cause other health conditions — particularly if you get stung multiple times. These conditions can include:

Low blood pressure (hypotension).
Arrhythmia (a heart rate that isn’t normal).
Hemolysis (the destruction of red blood cells).
Bronchospasm (when the muscles that line your bronchi tighten and cause your airways to narrow).
Pulmonary embolism (a blood clot in your lung).
Encephalitis (a severe brain infection).
Kidney failure (when your kidneys can’t function well on their own).
Rhabdomyolysis (a life-threatening condition that causes muscle breakdown).

If you have multiple yellow jacket stings, you should see a healthcare provider right away — even if you’re not allergic.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How do healthcare providers diagnose yellow jacket stings?

If you get stung, you’ll know. But you might not know what type of sting you have, especially if you didn’t see it happen.

Chances are, you probably don’t need to know what type of insect stung you to get appropriate treatment. But if you have a severe allergic reaction, it’s important to learn this information in case you get another sting in the future. When necessary, healthcare providers can run blood tests to determine what type of sting you have.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you treat a yellow jacket sting?

If you’re not allergic to yellow jackets, you can usually treat the sting with over-the-counter medications and home remedies.

If you’re allergic to yellow jacket venom, you’ll need emergency medical treatment. Call 911 — and if you have an EpiPen, use it immediately. (Place the orange tip of the EpiPen against the middle of your outer thigh, hold the button in to give the injection and count to three before removing it.) Wait for help to arrive.

Removing a yellow jacket stinger

Remove the stinger if it’s still in your skin. Pluck it out or use a clean, blunt straightedge (like the back of a knife) and scrape it across the stinger. Then, wash the site thoroughly with antibacterial soap and water.

How to treat a yellow jacket sting at home

After you remove the stinger and wash the area, apply an ice pack. This can help reduce immediate pain and swelling. Then, find a medication to counteract lingering symptoms. You might already have products in your medicine cabinet at home that you can use to treat a yellow jacket sting, like:

Antihistamines.
Hydrocortisone cream.
Calamine lotion.

If your yellow jacket sting won’t stop hurting, you can also take an over-the-counter pain reliever like acetaminophen (Tylenol®) or ibuprofen (Advil®).

These treatments can help ease sting symptoms in children and adults alike. Just be sure to read the dosage instructions and use the medication accordingly.

Emergency treatment for yellow jacket sting

You only need emergency treatment if you have anaphylactic symptoms (difficulty breathing, trouble swallowing). If you or someone you’re with has a severe allergic reaction to a yellow jacket sting:

Call 911 immediately.
Use an EpiPen if available.
Start CPR if the person isn’t breathing.

Once the medical team arrives, they’ll begin emergency treatment, which may include:

Epinephrine.
Intravenous (IV) antihistamines.
Corticosteroids.
Breathing support.
Lab tests.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
How long does the pain last after a yellow jacket sting?

Many people describe a painful, burning sensation at the site of the sting. This can last around one to two hours. Redness and swelling may linger for several more days. In most cases, swelling goes away within a week.

Can you die from a yellow jacket sting?

Even one yellow jacket sting can be fatal for people who are allergic to the venom. But if you’re not allergic, it would take around 1,500 yellow jacket stings to result in fatality.

Prevention
----------
How can I prevent yellow jacket stings?

Yellow jackets are part of our ecosystem. Though it may feel unfortunate, you can’t make them go away or wish them out of existence. But there are things you can do to reduce your risk of getting stung while spending time outdoors:

Stay away from places where yellow jackets commonly build nests (garbage cans, tree stumps, hollow logs).
Avoid wearing bright clothing.
Don’t wear perfume, cologne or other scented beauty products.
Apply insect repellent.
Don’t go barefoot.
Dispose of trash properly, and put food away when you’re done eating.
If a yellow jacket comes near you, try to remain calm. Swatting makes them more likely to sting.

Living With
-----------
When should I see a healthcare provider?

Unless you’re allergic, you probably don’t need to see a healthcare provider for a yellow jacket sting. But if you had a recent sting that caused a severe allergic reaction, let your healthcare provider know. They’ll likely want to run lab tests to confirm what type of insect stung you.

When should I go to the ER?

Call 911 or head to your nearest emergency room right away if you develop wheezing, difficulty swallowing or any of the anaphylactic symptoms outlined in this article.

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Can a yellow jacket sting cause cellulitis?

An insect can’t give you cellulitis. But the wound that results from a yellow jacket sting can leave you vulnerable to this type of infection, especially if you pick or scratch at it.

Symptoms of cellulitis may include:

Redness.
Swelling.
Warmth.
Red streaks.
Yellow discharge from the wound.
Swollen lymph nodes.

If you develop any of these symptoms, call a healthcare provider right away. They can give you antibiotics to get rid of the infection and recommend any other necessary treatments.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Yellow jackets are excellent pollinators and an essential part of our ecosystem. But their aggressive, territorial nature makes them dangerous to humans — especially to those who are allergic to their venom. But knowledge is power. With a little planning and attentiveness, you can still enjoy that pool party or backyard BBQ. Take care and be vigilant during the warmer months. They’re most active in late summer and early fall. If you’re prone to severe allergies, get an EpiPen to carry with you.
