Parvovirus B19 Infection
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/16633-parvovirus-infection

Overview
--------
What is parvovirus B19?

Parvovirus B19 is a virus that can cause symptoms like a rash and joint pain. It’s the virus that causes fifth disease in kids. But it can also make you sick as an adult.

A parvovirus infection in kids is more likely to cause a rash. As an adult, you might not have a rash, but instead have joint pain similar to arthritis. This can last for weeks or months.

You're at a higher risk of serious complications from parvovirus infections if you're pregnant, have a weakened immune system or have certain blood disorders.

B19 is the most well-known parvovirus, but other parvoviruses can infect people. These include human tetraparvoviruses, human bocaparvoviruses and human protoparvoviruses. They all cause similar symptoms.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of parvovirus B19?

Symptoms of a parvovirus infection include:

Rash. This most commonly appears on kids’ faces but it could appear anywhere.
Joint pain.
Fever.
Headache.
Cough.
Sore throat.
Parvovirus rash

The rash that parvovirus B19 causes often appears on kids’ faces and is sometimes called a “slapped cheek” rash, because of how it looks. It’s usually bright red and can have a lacy appearance. The rash is also called fifth disease. This isn’t common in adults.

Parvovirus rash can also appear on other parts of your body, like your arms, legs, chest, back or butt. It might be itchy. It can last a week or two or come and go for several weeks.

How do you get parvovirus?

Parvovirus B19 spreads in the same way other respiratory viruses spread — through coughing, sneezing and touching things that someone with the virus touched. This includes surfaces, like countertops and doorknobs, and objects like toys or phones.

It can also spread through blood (like during a blood transfusion or from touching someone’s blood or body fluids) and from a pregnant woman to the fetus.

Who’s at higher risk for a parvovirus infection?

Anyone can get parvovirus B19. But you might be at a higher risk for complications if you:

Are pregnant.
Have a weakened immune system.
Have sickle cell disease, autoimmune hemolytic anemia or another disorder that can cause a low red blood cell count.
What are the complications of parvovirus?

Complications of parvovirus B19 include:

Severe anemia. Parvovirus can affect your body’s ability to make red blood cells.
Pregnancy loss. Getting a parvovirus infection while you’re pregnant can put you at a higher risk for miscarriage or stillbirth.
Hydrops fetalis. This is a serious condition that can happen if you’re pregnant and have a parvovirus infection. The condition causes fluid to build up inside the fetus.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Rarely, kids can develop long-lasting joint pain and swelling after a parvovirus infection.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is parvovirus B19 diagnosed?

Providers can diagnose parvovirus B19 using a variety of tests, including:

Blood tests. A blood test can detect antibodies to parvovirus B19, which indicates whether you have or have had the disease.
Nucleic acid testing (NAT). Providers can test a blood or bone marrow sample for parvovirus B19 using PCR testing or another NAT. Providers often use this to test for active infections in people with compromised immune systems.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you get rid of parvovirus?

There aren’t any treatments for parvovirus, but it usually goes away on its own without any complications.

You may need a blood transfusion if you develop anemia or if you’re pregnant and the fetus develops hydrops fetalis. Providers also sometimes use intravenous immunoglobin (IVIG) treatment to help you fight off an infection if you have complications.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
Can parvovirus go away on its own?

Yes, parvovirus usually goes away on its own in a week or two. The rash can sometimes start to go away but then come back, coming and going for a few weeks. Joint pain can sometimes last a few months.

Your provider may recommend over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers, fluids and plenty of rest to help you feel better.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to your provider if you have symptoms of parvovirus, especially if you’re pregnant, have a compromised immune system or have a blood disorder.

When should I go to the ER?

Go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of severe illness, including:

Weakness or fainting.
Chest pain.
Difficulty breathing.
Bluish or grayish skin, lips or nails (cyanosis).
Heart palpitations.
Feeling of impending doom.

Prevention
----------
Can parvovirus be prevented?

Tips for reducing your risk of getting or spreading a parvovirus infection include:

Wash your hands frequently with soap and water.
Avoid close contact with people who may be infected.
Cover your mouth when you sneeze or cough.
Avoid touching your nose, mouth and eyes.
Stay home from work or school if you’re infected.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Can humans get parvovirus from dogs?

No, you can’t get parvovirus from dogs or other animals. The parvovirus that infects humans is different from the type that infects dogs.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
When you have a kid, it can seem like a different virus is always lurking around every corner. Parvovirus is one of them — it’s common but, fortunately, almost always mild. You should take precautions to avoid getting sick if you’re pregnant, have a blood disorder or have a compromised immune system. Talk to your healthcare provider if you have concerns.
