Persistent Depressive Disorder (PDD)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/9292-persistent-depressive-disorder-pdd

Overview
--------
What is persistent depressive disorder (PDD)?

Persistent depressive disorder (PDD), formerly known as dysthymia or dysthymic disorder, is mild or moderate depression that doesn’t go away. If you have persistent depressive disorder, you may experience low mood, as well as other symptoms, occurring most days without going away.

How common is persistent depressive disorder?

Researchers estimate that 1.5% of U.S. adults had persistent depressive disorder in the past year. They estimate that 2.5% of U.S. adults have experienced persistent depressive disorder at some time in their lives.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of persistent depressive disorder?

The main symptom of persistent depressive disorder is a sad, low or dark mood. Other persistent depressive disorder symptoms may include:

Fatigue.
Feelings of hopelessness and/or worthlessness.
Lack of appetite or overeating.
Lack of concentration.
Limited energy.
Low self-esteem.
Difficulty performing at work or school.
Trouble sleeping or sleeping too much.
What causes persistent depressive disorder?

Scientists don’t fully understand what causes persistent depressive disorder. Most likely, depression is caused by abnormal connections between different parts of your brain, preventing your brain cells from communicating with each other as they should.

What are the risk factors for persistent depressive disorder?

Persistent depressive disorder affects women more often. The condition also tends to run in biological families. So, if you have a biological family member with persistent depressive disorder, you may be more likely to develop it.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is persistent depressive disorder diagnosed?

If you think you have persistent depressive disorder, talk to a healthcare provider. There aren’t any tests for chronic depression, so the diagnosis comes from discussions with your provider. Your provider also might refer you to a psychologist or psychiatrist for further evaluation.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is persistent depressive disorder treated?

The most effective persistent depressive disorder treatment combines medications and talk therapy, or counseling.

Antidepressants are prescription drugs that can relieve depression. There are many different kinds of medications for the treatment of depression. You may need to take medication for a month or longer before you feel a difference. Make sure to continue taking the medication exactly as your healthcare provider prescribes. If you have side effects, let your healthcare provider know.

Counseling can also help manage persistent depressive disorder. One type of therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), is often helpful for depression. A therapist or psychologist will help you examine your thoughts and emotions and how they affect your actions. CBT can help you unlearn negative thoughts and develop more positive thinking.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
Does persistent depressive disorder ever go away?

With medication, talk therapy and lifestyle changes, you can manage persistent depressive disorder and feel better.

But if your symptoms come back or don’t improve, talk to your healthcare provider.

Prevention
----------
Can persistent depressive disorder be prevented?

Although you can’t prevent depression, you can take steps to help reduce your risk of developing it. These things may also help improve your symptoms if you’ve already been diagnosed:

Get physical activity several times a week.
Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs.
Meditate.

Living With
-----------
When should I seek immediate care?

If you think about hurting yourself or someone else, tell somebody right away. You can tell a healthcare provider, a friend or a family member.

You can also contact the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline at 988. You’re not alone, and there’s always somebody who wants to help.

What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

Questions you may want to ask your provider include:

Do I have persistent depressive disorder or another form of depression?
What kind of treatment do you recommend?
Should I talk to a counselor?
Will medication help my depression?
How long will it take before I start to feel better?

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
If you’re feeling sad or down most of the day, for most days, over a long period of time, you may have persistent depressive disorder (PPD). It’s important to talk to a healthcare provider if you have depressive symptoms. Medication, counseling and healthy lifestyle choices can help make you feel better. If you feel like you might hurt yourself or someone else, seek help immediately — and remember: You’re not alone.
