Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21883-left-ventricular-hypertrophy

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of left ventricular hypertrophy

With mild left ventricular hypertrophy, you may not notice any symptoms. As the condition gets worse, you may have LVH symptoms that include:

Chest pain
Dizziness or fainting (syncope)
Fast or irregular heartbeat
Heart palpitations
Fatigue
Shortness of breath
LVH causes

There are many different diseases and conditions that may cause LVH. The most common cause of left ventricular hypertrophy is high blood pressure (hypertension). High blood pressure makes your heart work harder than normal. The extra work it takes to pump blood can make the muscle in your left ventricle walls get larger and thicker.

Intense athletic training can sometimes lead to an increase in the size and thickness of your left ventricle walls. But in most cases, athletes’ hearts still function normally and don’t need treatment.

Other conditions that can lead to LVH include:

Heart valve disease. This may include a leak or narrowing in your aortic valve or a leak in your mitral valve. All of these make it harder for blood to get where it needs to go.
Diabetes. High blood sugar levels that occur with diabetes can lead to heart damage.
Cardiomyopathy. Certain types of this heart muscle disease make your heart stiff or thick.
Aortic coarctation. This is a narrowing in part of your aorta, which makes it hard for blood to get through.
Cardiac amyloidosis. With this condition, proteins build up in your heart and make pumping more difficult.
Renal artery stenosis. This is a narrowing of the arteries that bring blood to your kidneys.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD). This is a hole in the wall of tissue between your two lower heart chambers.
Genetic diseases. More rarely, some inherited or acquired genetic variations can cause left ventricular hypertrophy, like Fabry disease and Danon disease, among others.
Risk factors

You may have a higher risk of LVH if you have:

A body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 (obesity)
Chronic kidney disease
Obstructive sleep apnea

You may also be at a higher risk of an enlarged left ventricle if you use tobacco products, eat a lot of salt and don’t get much physical activity.

What are the complications of left ventricular hypertrophy?

Other heart issues usually lead to left ventricular hypertrophy. Together, they can raise your risk of serious complications. Left untreated, LVH affects your heart’s ability to pump blood efficiently. These changes increase your risk of other issues, including:

Arrhythmia
Heart attack
Cardiac arrest
Heart failure
Stroke
Dementia

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose an enlarged left ventricle

Even if you aren’t having symptoms of LVH, your healthcare provider may find it during a routine heart screening. Because there are many different causes for LVH, your cardiologist may order different tests to rule out these conditions.

Tests providers use to diagnose left ventricular hypertrophy include:

Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG)
MRI
A technetium pyrophosphate scan, a nuclear imaging test to evaluate for cardiac amyloidosis
Blood work

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you treat left ventricular hypertrophy?

Treating the cause of LVH will help stop or slow disease progression. Depending on the cause, you may need to change your daily habits, take medicine or have surgery.

Left ventricular hypertrophy treatment may include:

Lifestyle changes. Heart-healthy habits can lower your blood pressure and reduce LVH complications. Good habits include eating healthy foods and being physically active.
Blood pressure medication. Lowering your blood pressure will help prevent left ventricular hypertrophy from worsening. It also can reduce your risk of heart failure, heart attack or stroke.
Other medicines. An SGLT2 inhibitor (an oral diabetes medicine) or allopurinol can help manage LVH.
Heart valve surgery. If aortic valve stenosis caused your condition, you may need aortic valve surgery to replace the narrowed valve. This allows blood to flow properly.
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD). This device can shock your heart when you have certain abnormal heart rhythms. This treats a complication of LVH.
Bariatric surgery. Surgery for weight loss can lower your weight and blood pressure. Lowering your blood pressure can keep LVH from getting worse.
When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should call your healthcare provider if you experience:

Severe chest pain
Shortness of breath
Signs of stroke
Sudden racing or irregular heartbeat

You may want to ask your healthcare provider:

Should I have testing to look for signs of left ventricular hypertrophy?
What medications will I need to take to manage my condition?
Will I need heart surgery?
What lifestyle changes can I make to improve my heart health?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Left ventricular hypertrophy can get better or worse. Studies have shown that LVH can improve — and even reverse — when you lower your blood pressure. Other factors come into play, though. If you’ve had high blood pressure a long time and have obesity, you may not be able to reverse LVH.

You may be able to live a normal life with LVH if you can manage the condition that caused it. Life expectancy with left ventricular hypertrophy is different from person to person. You may have many other conditions that stress your heart compared to someone who doesn’t. Your provider is the best person to help you understand what you can expect.

Prognosis of left ventricular hypertrophy

Left untreated, LVH (and related underlying heart conditions) increases your risk of serious heart disease or even death. Treatment to slow or stop the progression of left ventricular hypertrophy lowers the risk of severe heart damage. An early and accurate diagnosis is the key to improving the outlook for people with left ventricular hypertrophy.

Left untreated, LVH (and related underlying heart conditions) increases your risk of serious heart disease or even death. Treatment to slow or stop the progression of left ventricular hypertrophy lowers the risk of severe heart damage. An early and accurate diagnosis is the key to improving the outlook for people with left ventricular hypertrophy.

Prevention
----------
Can this be prevented?

If you have a heart condition that could lead to LVH, catching and treating it early can make a big difference. Treatment can help prevent left ventricular hypertrophy from developing. It can also reduce the risk of damage to your heart muscle.

Preventing or managing high blood pressure is the best way to prevent left ventricular hypertrophy. In addition to taking any medications your healthcare provider prescribes, you can:

Manage conditions that can cause LVH
Eat foods that are low in fat, salt and cholesterol
Be physically active on a regular basis
Reach and maintain a weight that’s healthy for you
Manage stress
Stop using tobacco products

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You may be surprised to learn that you have left ventricular hypertrophy. But finding it before it causes symptoms is a good thing. It means you can treat it before it gets worse. Even if you have symptoms, you can treat LVH. Ask your healthcare provider what steps you can take to treat this condition and improve your heart health.
