Listeria in Pregnancy
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/listeria-in-pregnancy

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
Listeria infection — or listeriosis — is a bacterial infection that can lead to pregnancy loss or lifelong health issues for your child. You get it from contaminated food (food poisoning).

Experts aren’t sure why, but you’re more likely to get infected with Listeria while pregnant. So, if you’re wondering why you’re not supposed to eat lunch meat anymore when you’re pregnant, it’s because of the Listeria risk.

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Listeria during pregnancy

Symptoms of a Listeria infection during pregnancy include:

Fever
Chills
Headache
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Muscle aches

You can be infected without having any symptoms.

How do I know if a baby has Listeria?

Symptoms of Listeria in a newborn or infant include:

Low birth weight
Fever
Difficulty breathing
Rash
Jaundice (yellowing of skin and eyes)
Difficulty feeding
Irritability

Your baby might develop symptoms at birth or up to two months later.

Causes of Listeria in pregnancy

Listeria monocytogenes bacteria cause a Listeria infection. You get it from contaminated foods, including:

Deli meats, cold cuts and hot dogs
Pâté and meat spreads
Cold-smoked fish, like lox
Soft cheese, like Brie, Camembert and queso fresco
Unpasteurized dairy products, like milk, cheese and ice cream (pasteurization kills germs)
Unpasteurized fruit juices like apple cider
Raw, unwashed fruits and vegetables (especially melon)
Sprouts
Raw sushi

Pregnant women can pass the infection to the fetus during pregnancy or birth (vertical transmission).

Can food poisoning while pregnant hurt the baby?

Yes, food poisoning while you’re pregnant can cause:

Miscarriage
Stillbirth
Preterm birth

Your baby can be born with a Listeria infection if you have one while you’re pregnant. This can cause meningitis (inflammation of the lining of their brain and spinal cord) or sepsis (a severe reaction to infection), leading to lifelong health conditions or death. Complications for newborns and infants include:

Paralysis
Seizures
Blindness
Developmental delays or differences
Organ damage or failure

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose Listeria in pregnancy

Healthcare providers diagnose Listeria infections with a blood culture. This is where a lab tries to get bacteria to grow from a sample of your blood. After birth, they might also test the placenta.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is Listeria treated in pregnancy?

Providers treat Listeria in pregnant women and newborns with antibiotics. If you might have been exposed to Listeria (like if you ate something that’s been recalled or made other people sick), your provider will recommend that you monitor yourself for symptoms. They’ll treat you if you develop symptoms.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to your pregnancy care provider if you have a fever or other symptoms during pregnancy, or if you think you’ve been exposed to Listeria. They can monitor your symptoms and determine if you need treatment.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I’m pregnant and have a Listeria infection?

If you have a Listeria infection and you’re pregnant, quick treatment can reduce your risk of pregnancy loss and other complications. It can also reduce your risk of passing the infection to the fetus.

Your provider may test your baby when they’re born or look for signs of Listeria. They can treat them as soon as possible if they’re infected.

Prevention
----------
Can Listeria be prevented during pregnancy?

The best way to prevent a Listeria infection in pregnancy is to:

Avoid high-risk foods, like soft cheeses, unpasteurized milk and juice, and deli meat.
Follow food safety guidelines, like washing fruits and vegetables thoroughly.
Cook meats to a safe temperature before eating.
Heat lunch meat and hot dogs to steaming.

Providers also recommend these same steps to reduce your risk if you’re trying to get pregnant.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
The list of things you’re not supposed to eat or drink during pregnancy may seem endless. Avoiding foods like soft cheeses and deli meats reduces your risk of Listeria. But don’t panic if you eat something on the list. If you develop symptoms or find out something in your fridge is recalled, let your provider know. Quick treatment can protect the health of your pregnancy.
