Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17896-factor-v-leiden

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of factor V Leiden thrombophilia

The gene change itself doesn’t cause any symptoms. It’s possible to have this disorder and never even know it. But you may develop symptoms if a blood clot forms.

If you have symptoms of DVT or a PE, call 911 or your local emergency number. Or ask someone to drive you to the nearest emergency room.

Symptoms of deep vein thrombosis include:

Swelling, warmth and skin color changes in your leg or arm
Tenderness or pain in your leg or arm
Larger-than-normal veins near your skin’s surface
Pain in your belly or flank (if blood clots affect veins in your abdomen)
Severe, sudden headache and/or seizures (if blood clots affect veins in your brain)

Symptoms of a pulmonary embolism include:

Sudden shortness of breath
Sharp chest pain that feels worse when you take deep breaths, cough or sneeze
Cough, which may produce blood
Wheezing
Fast heartbeat (tachycardia)
Feeling anxious
Feeling lightheaded or fainting
Causes of factor V Leiden thrombophilia

A gene variant causes factor V Leiden. “Coagulation factor V” is the name of a protein that helps your blood clot when needed, like after an injury. Your F5 gene tells your body how to make this protein.

Most people are born with two normal copies of the F5 gene. But if you inherit an abnormal copy, you have the factor V Leiden variant (sometimes called a mutation). “Leiden” is the city in the Netherlands where researchers discovered this gene variant.

The factor V Leiden variant tells your body to make a protein that has one small change in its structure. This change makes the protein resist other proteins (protein C and protein S) that stop excessive clotting. Without this check, factor V can make your blood clot when it shouldn’t.

Does this pass down within families?

Yes. You inherit this condition from one or both of your biological parents. Factor V Leiden follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. That means only one of your parents has to pass the gene variant on to you for you to inherit it.

Most people with factor V Leiden inherit just one abnormal gene copy (heterozygous). Rarely, you can inherit two abnormal gene copies — one from each parent (homozygous).

Risk factors for developing a blood clot

You’re more likely to develop a blood clot if you:

Inherited two copies of an abnormal F5 gene (homozygous)
Have a history of DVT or PE in your biological family
Have additional blood clotting disorders
Undergo surgery
Are pregnant
Take estrogen-based therapies like certain forms of contraception or hormone replacement therapy

Talk to your healthcare provider about your risk for developing blood clots and what precautions you should take.

Complications of this condition

If you have factor V Leiden thrombophilia, you may experience:

DVT or a PE before age 50
Multiple episodes of DVT or PE
Blood clots in less commonly affected veins, like those in your liver or brain
DVT or a PE during pregnancy or postpartum
DVT or a PE soon after starting birth control pills or hormone therapy

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Blood tests (including genetic testing) can show if you have factor V Leiden thrombophilia. Your healthcare provider may suggest testing for the condition if:

You have a history of DVT or PE, particularly at a younger age than expected
One or more of your biological family members have a history of blood clots

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is factor V Leiden thrombophilia treated?

It’s a lifelong condition. There’s no cure or treatment for the gene variant itself. Instead, treatment involves breaking up any blood clots that form and lowering your risk of future clots. Your provider may recommend:

Anticoagulant medication (blood thinners) to break up clots and prevent new ones
Compression stockings to improve blood flow in your legs and lower the risk of clots
Placement of a vena cava filter to prevent blood clots from traveling to your lungs
Surgery to remove blood clots

How long you need to take blood thinners depends on your risk of blood clots coming back. Some people only need to take them for a few months. Others need them long term. Your provider will explain the best treatment plan for you.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Visit your provider for a yearly checkup. If you’ve been diagnosed with DVT or a PE, you’ll have frequent follow-up appointments so your provider can check treatment progress. If you’re taking warfarin, you’ll need routine blood testing (prothrombin time test) to check how well your medication is working.

It’s also important to talk to your provider:

Before using contraception or hormone replacement therapy
Before becoming pregnant

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What is the life expectancy of someone with factor V Leiden?

Factor V Leiden doesn’t affect life expectancy in most people. Even if you develop a blood clot, prompt treatment can prevent a fatal outcome. It’s important to talk to your provider about any concerns you have related to life expectancy or future complications.

What should I avoid if I have factor V Leiden?

Your healthcare provider will tailor advice to your needs. In general, you should avoid:

Smoking, vaping and other tobacco use
Long periods of sitting
Drinking too much alcohol, or drinking any alcohol on long plane flights
Using estrogen-based contraception and hormone replacement therapy (talk to your provider first)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
What’s the difference between factor V deficiency and factor V Leiden thrombophilia?

These are two different genetic conditions. Both conditions involve changes to the F5 gene. With factor V Leiden, the change makes your blood clot too easily. But with factor V deficiency, the change stops your blood from clotting when it should.

Factor V deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder that affects about 1 in 1,000,000 people. It can involve recurrent nosebleeds, heavy menstrual bleeding and prolonged bleeding after surgery.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
If you or a loved one has factor V Leiden thrombophilia, you might worry about what the future will bring. It may ease your mind to know that most people with this disorder never have a blood clot. But if you do develop clots, there are treatments that can help. Following your provider’s guidance can help you find and manage problems early before they interrupt the flow of your life.
