Food Coma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/food-coma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of a food coma

With postprandial sleepiness, you may become noticeably more tired after eating. The condition can develop anywhere from 30 minutes to four hours after a meal. With the tiredness, you may feel your mental alertness drop off. You may have a harder time completing certain tasks.

What causes a food coma?

At one time, researchers believed that blood flowing away from your brain after a meal led to a food coma. Now, they know this isn’t accurate. Multiple factors can cause postprandial somnolence:

Signals from your gut
Changes in blood metabolites, like glucose and amino acids
Shifts in your brain’s arousal pathways

Your body clock also has an early afternoon dip that can make you feel sleepier.

Risk factors

The risk of postprandial somnolence is greater in:

Night-shift workers
Young adults who haven’t gotten a lot of sleep
People age 65 and older (especially with other medical conditions)

Food comas are also more likely to occur in people with certain health conditions, including:

Type 2 diabetes
Overweight
Obesity
Metabolic syndrome
Sleep disorders
Depression

Medicines that can worsen after-meal drowsiness include:

Sedatives for sleep or anxiety, like benzodiazepines and Z-drugs
Sedating antidepressants
Antipsychotics
Sedating antihistamines
Gabapentinoids
Opioids
Some blood pressure medicines, like beta-blockers and alpha-blockers

Talk to your healthcare provider about your medications if you’re concerned about feeling sleepy after meals.

Complications of postprandial somnolence

Most of the time, a food coma will pass quickly and not lead to any issues. But the condition can be a problem for many different types of workers. Office workers may fall asleep at their desks after lunch. It can also affect their work performance.

A food coma can have a more serious effect on people who drive or work with heavy machinery. They run the risk of experiencing accidents and injuries.

Do not drive or operate machinery if you feel sleepy after a meal. Pull over, take a short nap or delay the task until you’re alert.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose a food coma

Most of the time, you won’t see a doctor for a food coma. The condition will pass without the need for treatment.

But you should see a provider if you have:

Frequent or severe daytime sleepiness
Loud snoring or breathing pauses
Dizziness or fainting after meals
Shakiness, sweating or confusion a few hours after eating
Symptoms of diabetes, like thirst, frequent urination or blurred vision

A provider will perform a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. They’ll also want to know about your eating habits, including:

What you eat
When you eat
How much you eat

They may also test your level of fatigue using a screening tool like the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS). This test can help your provider figure out how daytime sleepiness is affecting you.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How to wake up from a food coma

Once you’re in a food coma, it can be hard to get out of the afternoon slump. Treatment for postprandial somnolence usually isn’t necessary. If it’s having a great effect on your life, your healthcare provider may suggest:

Eating smaller, balanced meals that prioritize protein, fiber and lower-GI carbohydrates
Limiting alcohol at lunch
Taking a 10- to 30-minute walk after eating
Taking a 20-minute nap when possible
How long can you be in a food coma?

Sleepiness often starts 30 minutes to two hours after a meal. The condition can last up to three to four hours.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Most often, a food coma won’t have any long-term or serious effects on your health. These periods of tiredness usually pass within a few hours of eating. If you have excessive daytime sleepiness, talk to a healthcare provider. They can offer treatment options that may work for you.

Prevention
----------
How to avoid postprandial somnolence

Western-style eating patterns are linked with poorer sleep and more daytime sleepiness. These include:

Foods high in saturated fat
Refined grains/sugars
Processed meats

Plant-forward, Mediterranean-style eating patterns are linked with better sleep and less excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS). These include:

Fiber
Fruits/vegetables
Whole grains
Unsaturated fats

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is a food coma a sign of diabetes?

Not by itself. Occasional post-meal sleepiness is common. If it’s frequent or you also have symptoms of diabetes (or signs of reactive hypoglycemia or postprandial hypotension), talk with a healthcare provider about screening. For example, A1c and, sometimes, an oral glucose tolerance test.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
We’ve all felt it. That unmistakable feeling of sleepiness after a big meal. Food comas, or postprandial somnolences, are a unique phenomenon. Researchers still aren’t clear on why they happen. But fortunately, the effect doesn’t usually have any serious impacts on your health.
