Calf Strain (Pulled Calf Muscle)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21558-pulled-calf-muscle

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of calf muscle strains

Calf strain symptoms may include:

Bruising on your calf muscle
Difficulty tensing your calf muscles or standing on your toes
Muscle pain when flexing your ankle or pointing your toes
Difficulty bending your knee
Snapping or popping sensation in your calf
Sudden calf muscle pain
Swelling in your calf muscle

Most people with a strained calf muscle say they can’t continue with their activity immediately following an injury.

Calf muscle strain causes

Calf strains usually occur when someone suddenly moves or overstretches their calf after standing still. Quick pivots, jumps or abrupt stops can cause strains. This injury is especially common when your toes get forced upward (toward your body) and your ankle pulls your calf muscles down too quickly.

Risk factors

Anyone can get a pulled calf muscle. But these strains are more common in athletes who perform lots of stop-and-go movements with quick bursts of speed. Sprinters, football players, soccer players and tennis players are prone to strained calf muscles. Sometimes, the injury is called “tennis leg.”

Other risk factors for calf strains include:

Age. People over age 40 may be more likely to get strains during physical activity.
Lack of conditioning. It’s important to warm up and stretch before physical activity and condition your muscles before the start of a sports season.
Medical history. People with a history of calf strains or other leg injuries are more likely to get a new injury.
Muscle quality. People with tight or short calf muscles have a higher risk of calf muscle strains.
Sex. Some studies suggest that males are more likely to get calf muscle injuries.
Complications of calf strains

Depending on the severity of your condition, complications of a pulled calf muscle may include:

Chronic pain
Compartment syndrome
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Reinjury
Scar tissue

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose calf strains

A healthcare provider will perform a physical exam and review your symptoms. It’s important to describe in detail how you got the injury and how your calf felt immediately after the injury. This information can help your healthcare provider make a diagnosis.

Tests that are used

You may need imaging exams to rule out other conditions that cause lower leg pain, like Achilles tendon ruptures or deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Research shows that up to 10% of people with symptoms of calf pulls have DVT, which can be a life-threatening condition.

Your healthcare provider may request the following tests:

Ultrasound, to check for blood clots around your calf muscles
MRI, to assess for rupture

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you heal a calf strain quickly?

Pulled calf muscle treatment usually includes RICE, which stands for:

Rest. Stop running or physical activity to avoid further damaging your calf muscle.
Ice. Apply an ice pack or cold compress for 20 minutes every two hours. Don’t apply ice directly to your skin.
Compression. Reduce swelling and fluid buildup by applying a compression bandage or wrap to the injured area.
Elevation. Lift your leg into an elevated position, preferably above the level of your heart. Support the entire length of your leg with pillows, blankets or cushions.

You can perform RICE at home, but it’s always good to check in with your healthcare provider about any special instructions.

Once your provider diagnoses your injury, they may recommend additional calf strain treatment, including:

Pain relievers
Physical therapy
Soft cast or boot to keep your lower leg from moving

While healing from a calf strain, you should avoid:

Applying heat to the injured area
Drinking alcohol
Massaging your calf
Walking or participating in physical activity
Calf strain recovery time

Most people recover fully from pulled calf muscles without any permanent damage. Ask your healthcare provider when you can gradually start to do light activities again. Depending on the severity of your injury, it may be several weeks or even months before you can return to full activities.

Once you’ve had a calf muscle strain, you have a higher risk for future strains in that area. Reduce your risk of reinjury by allowing your injury to fully heal before getting back to normal activities.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should contact your provider if you:

Are unable to walk or bear weight on your leg
Can’t bend or flex your foot, ankle or knee
Have severe pain in your calf
Notice swelling in your lower leg, foot or ankle

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
How can I prevent a calf strain?

You can reduce your risk of a pulled calf muscle by:

Keeping your calf muscles strong and conditioned
Not pushing through the pain
Resting and recovering between workouts
Stretching routinely
Using proper technique when playing sports
Warming up and stretching your calf muscles before physical activity
Wearing supportive footwear that fits properly

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Playing sports that require lots of quick movements can come with a risk of injury. Calf strains (pulled calf muscle) are one of the most common injuries that affect athletes. But anyone can pull a calf muscle. If you do, you’ll probably experience pain, swelling, and trouble bending and flexing your foot, ankle or knee. Don’t wait to get treatment. While you can probably treat a mild sprain with the RICE method, a trip to a healthcare provider’s office can ensure that you’re on your way to getting back on your feet sooner rather than later.
