Candidiasis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/23198-candidiasis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
A candidiasis infection causes symptoms where Candida naturally live in small amounts, like your skin, mouth, throat or vagina.

Symptoms of candidiasis

Candidiasis symptoms vary depending on the type and location of the infection. Symptoms of candidiasis may include:

Abnormal vaginal discharge
Burning sensation
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)
Itching (pruritus)
Loss of taste (ageusia)
Pain and soreness
Skin rash with small, raised bumps
White patches or sores in your mouth and throat

Many people who develop invasive candidiasis are already ill. So, it can be difficult to determine which symptoms are from their original conditions and which are from the infection. But as the infection spreads throughout your body, you may experience fever and chills.

Candidiasis causes

An overgrowth of Candida yeast causes candidiasis infections. This occurs when there’s an imbalance between healthy bacteria and Candida yeast on your body. Triggers that can disrupt this balance include:

Being immunocompromised
Eating foods high in refined carbohydrates, sugar or yeast
Experiencing hormonal changes, like pregnancy or menopause
Feeling stressed
Having certain medical conditions, including cancer, diabetes and HIV/AIDS
Taking certain medications, including antibiotics, oral contraceptives and steroids
Risk factors

Candidiasis can affect anyone because yeast naturally lives on your body, and it’s easy to upset the balance of healthy bacteria and yeast. But there are certain groups of people who are more likely to develop an infection. Candidiasis most often affects:

Catheter users
Denture users
Newborns and infants
People in hospitals
People with diabetes
Pregnant women

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose candidiasis

Your healthcare provider will perform a physical examination of the affected area and ask you about your medical history. They’ll also ask you questions about your symptoms, including their severity and how long you’ve had them.

Your provider may be able to diagnose oral candidiasis by the appearance of your mouth or throat. For other types of candidiasis, they’ll likely request testing to confirm a diagnosis.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you treat a candidiasis infection?

The No. 1 treatment option for a candidiasis yeast infection is an antifungal medication. Depending on the type and severity of the infection, your healthcare provider may prescribe an antifungal that’s topical (cream or ointment) or oral (pill, lozenge or liquid). For severe infections, you may need to receive an antifungal intravenously (through a vein).

Invasive candidiasis will require more intensive treatment. Your provider will likely start with an intravenous antifungal like echinocandin.

Can I take over-the-counter medications to treat candidiasis?

Yes, you can take an over-the-counter (OTC) antifungal medication. But the success of OTC medicine is dependent on knowing which type of yeast you’re trying to treat. This can be difficult to identify without visiting your healthcare provider. They can perform a culture test of the infection and give you a specific plan to treat your infection.

How long does candidiasis last?

Most mild to moderate cases of candidiasis will clear up in two to three days after you complete treatment. More severe cases may take a couple of weeks to clear up completely after treatment.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

You should contact your healthcare provider when you notice any symptoms of candidiasis, including:

Itchiness
Pain
Rash
Swelling

Untreated candidiasis symptoms could become worse over time. So, it’s best to visit your provider at the first sign of infection to start treatment.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have candidiasis?

Treatment for candidiasis is extremely effective. Symptoms are bothersome but should start to fade after treatment begins. Infections usually clear up completely between two days and two weeks, depending on the type and severity.

If left untreated, symptoms of candidiasis can cause irritation and discomfort and could increase in severity over time. Sometimes, candidiasis returns after treatment, so it’s best to work with your healthcare provider on a treatment plan. They can target the specific type of yeast that caused the overgrowth on your body.

Prevention
----------
Can candidiasis be prevented?

You may be able to prevent candidiasis by:

Maintaining good physical and oral hygiene
Managing your stress
Reducing the amount of refined carbohydrates and sugar you eat
Talking with your healthcare provider about medications you’re taking
Treating current medical conditions

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Although candidiasis can cause uncomfortable symptoms like itching and soreness, you can rest easy knowing that it’s not usually a serious infection. Treatment with an antifungal medication should clear up your symptoms quickly. Each antifungal has specific instructions, so make sure you ask your healthcare provider to explain how to apply or take the medication and how long you should take it.

Even if your symptoms stop, continue taking the antifungal as advised by your provider. This will completely clear the infection and prevent it from coming back.
