Cardiorenal Syndrome
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/25240-cardiorenal-syndrome

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of cardiorenal syndrome

Cardiorenal syndrome symptoms may differ depending on the organ it started in and when. They include:

Chronic pain
Confusion
Depression
Fatigue
A feeling of your heart skipping a beat
Low pee output
Shortness of breath
Swelling of your legs and belly
Cardiorenal syndrome causes

Causes of cardiorenal syndrome may include:

Electrolyte disorders
Heart surgery complications
Heart valve disease
Inflammation in your kidneys, heart or blood vessels
Kidney disease or injury
Low blood flow (heart attack, heart failure or shock)
Pulmonary embolism (PE)
Sepsis
Types of cardiorenal syndrome

When healthcare providers talk about this condition, they assign it a type based on the organ that started it and how long ago it began.

Cardiorenal syndrome types are:

Type 1 (Acute cardiorenal): Your heart suddenly isn’t working well, which leads to injury to your kidneys. This makes your kidneys unable to do their job well. This is an acute problem for all organs involved.
Type 2 (Chronic cardiorenal): Chronic issues with how well your heart works harm your kidneys over time.
Type 3 (Acute renocardiac): Acute kidney injury causes acute heart failure.
Type 4 (Chronic renocardiac): Chronic kidney disease causes long-term issues with your heart, like abnormal heart rhythms, heart failure or coronary artery disease (CAD).
Type 5 (Secondary cardiorenal): A disorder that affects your whole body makes your heart and kidneys unable to work well.
Risk factors

Cardiorenal syndrome risk factors include:

A body mass index (BMI) greater than 30
Blood vessel disorders
Diabetes
Hardening of your arteries
Heart failure
High blood pressure
Kidney disease

You may be able to lower your risk of cardiorenal disease by treating these conditions. Taking the right medications for these conditions at the right dose is important. Otherwise, they can make your kidney function worse.

Complications of this condition

With cardiorenal syndrome, you don’t have a normal amount of blood and fluids in your body. When you have heart failure, your heart can’t pump as well as it should. This allows fluid to collect in parts of your body. Your kidneys play a role in moving fluid out of your body to maintain the right fluid level. It can be challenging to achieve this when you have issues with your heart and kidneys at the same time.

Cardiorenal disease can lead to:

Cardiogenic shock
Hardening of your arteries
Inflammation
Liver failure
Respiratory failure
Worsening kidney disease

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Cardiorenal syndrome doesn’t have one “gold standard” test a healthcare provider can use to diagnose it. A provider may get information by examining the amount of fluid in your body. They do this by assessing your heart, lungs, belly, legs and blood vessels. Also, they may order various tests.

Healthcare providers can diagnose cardiorenal syndrome with:

Blood tests
Chest X-ray
Echocardiogram
Right heart catheterization
Ultrasound of your kidneys and/or chest
Urinalysis (a set of tests on your pee)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

Cardiorenal syndrome treatments range from medicines to devices to transplants.

Medicines for this condition include:

ACE inhibitors
ARBs
ARNI (angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitors)
Beta-blockers
Diuretics
Inotropes
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists
Renin angiotensin system blockers

Procedures and devices for cardiorenal syndrome include:

Ultrafiltration or dialysis
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
Left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
Heart transplant
Kidney transplant
When should I see my healthcare provider?

Tell your provider about any symptoms you have that are new or get worse. Keep your scheduled appointments with your provider. Get immediate help if you’re not producing pee or you can’t catch your breath.

Questions to ask your provider include:

What’s the best treatment for me?
Can you treat me with medications?
Is there a support group for people with cardiorenal disease?
How advanced is my condition?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Getting an early diagnosis for cardiorenal syndrome is important. Having the right treatment when you need it can improve your quality of life.

The prognosis for cardiorenal syndrome is poor. Your risk of death is higher with this condition than if you only had a kidney issue or a heart issue. Palliative care can help you if you have advanced cardiorenal syndrome. It can help you avoid trips to the hospital.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Having cardiorenal syndrome is difficult because it means that three important organs — your heart and two kidneys — aren’t working right. Follow your provider’s instructions as closely as you can for the best results. Informing your loved ones about your wishes can give you peace of mind. If your condition worsens quickly and you have a living will, it can guide your family in deciding what care you want.

Medically Reviewed

Last reviewed on 08/07/2025.

Learn more about the Health Library and our editorial process.

References
