Cerebellar Hypoplasia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/cerebellar-hypoplasia

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of cerebellar hypoplasia

Symptoms vary for each child. They depend on factors like the underlying cause or part of the cerebellum that didn’t develop as expected.

Common symptoms that affect infants include:

Abnormal eye movements and difficulty with visual tracking
Developmental delays (like not learning to walk or talk at the expected age)
Difficulty with balance when walking
Intellectual disability
Seizures (less often)
Weak muscle tone

Common symptoms in older children may include:

Clumsiness
Dizziness
Headaches
Hearing loss
Cerebellar hypoplasia causes

Many things may cause this rare condition. These include problems with the development of the cerebellum due to a pregnancy complication or a genetic condition caused by changes or mutations in your baby’s DNA.

Cerebellar hypoplasia can occur by itself, or it may occur as part of a syndrome such as:

CHARGE syndrome
Joubert syndrome
Wilson disease
Certain metabolic disorders
Other conditions related to DNA changes
Risk factors of cerebellar hypoplasia

If you’re pregnant, your child may be more at risk of developing this condition if you:

Smoke or use tobacco products
Drink alcohol
Take antiseizure medication
Have a virus (Zika virus or cytomegalovirus)

These factors may affect how a fetus’s cerebellum develops. In addition, a baby with preterm birth or low birth weight may be more likely to have cerebellar hypoplasia.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose cerebellar hypoplasia

A healthcare provider will review imaging tests to diagnose this condition. They’re looking for any size and shape abnormalities of your child’s cerebellum. They may notice signs on an ultrasound during pregnancy. A provider may order an MRI scan for babies or children who have symptoms.

Additional tests may help confirm the underlying cause, like genetic testing or testing for an infection or other exposure during pregnancy.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is cerebellar hypoplasia treated?

Because symptoms vary from person to person, a healthcare provider will create a treatment plan to help your child manage their symptoms specifically. This may include:

Educational support
Occupational therapy (to help with skills such as reaching and grabbing or handwriting)
Physical therapy (to help with skills like balance while walking)
Speech therapy (to help with skills like producing clear speech)
When should my child see their healthcare provider?

Contact your child’s pediatrician if you notice they’re not reaching developmental milestones as expected. This could include not walking or talking at the appropriate age.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if my child has cerebellar hypoplasia?

Many children with this condition will need some support in their motor skills (such as using utensils or balancing while walking) or intellectual skills (to help with learning). Some children with cerebellar hypoplasia may need lifelong supportive care. How much care depends on the severity. For example, whether their cerebellum is mildly or severely underdeveloped and the underlying cause, and whether or not there are other related symptoms.

Many different treatment options are available based on your child’s needs. Their care team can help you choose the best treatment for your child’s situation.

Cerebellar hypoplasia life expectancy

The life expectancy varies depending on the cause and what symptoms your child has. For example, some children have a normal life expectancy, while others may not survive childhood. Your child’s case may or may not match statistics. It’s best to talk to your child’s provider to learn more about what you can expect.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You’ll probably have a lot of questions if your child receives a cerebellar hypoplasia diagnosis. You may feel overwhelmed at the prospect of raising a child who may need a lifetime of medical care and support. If that’s your situation, look to your child’s healthcare providers for more information. They’ll be with you every step of the way to make sure you have the support you need.
