Cervical Dysplasia
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/15678-cervical-intraepithelial-neoplasia-cin

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of cervical dysplasia

Cervical dysplasia doesn’t usually cause symptoms. But some women may have irregular vaginal bleeding or spotting after intercourse.

Most women who have cervical dysplasia find out they have it after a routine Pap smear.

Cervical dysplasia causes

A virus called HPV (human papillomavirus) causes cervical dysplasia. HPV is the most common viral sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the U.S.

If you have cervical dysplasia, you have HPV. Some women have HPV but don’t develop cervical dysplasia.

Over 100 strains of HPV exist. In many cases, your immune system will get rid of the virus. But some strains, like HPV-16 and HPV-18, are more likely to cause cervical dysplasia.

Risk factors

Researchers don’t know why some women with HPV develop cervical dysplasia while others don’t.

Risk factors include:

Smoking cigarettes. Smoking and using products that contain tobacco can double your risk of cervical dysplasia.
Having a weakened immune system. This makes it harder for your body to fight an HPV infection.

The strain of HPV and how long you’ve had the untreated infection may also play roles in developing cervical dysplasia.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Your healthcare provider may notice signs of cervical dysplasia during a routine internal exam. They may do a test called a Pap smear. This is when your provider collects a sample of cervical cells that a pathologist can look at under a microscope. If the Pap smear reveals abnormal cells, you may need a:

Colposcopy: Your provider performs and internal exam with a lighted instrument to check for abnormal cells in your cervix or vaginal walls.
Biopsy: Your provider removes tissue samples that a pathologist examines in a laboratory.

Your healthcare provider will go over the results with you. Together, you’ll determine the next steps for treatment.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What is the treatment for cervical dysplasia?

Treatment depends on various factors like:

The severity of cervical dysplasia.
Your age and overall health.
Your treatment preferences.

Procedures to treat cervical dysplasia can impact pregnancy. Your healthcare provider will go over your options if you’re pregnant or plan to become pregnant.

CIN 1 treatment

With low-grade cervical dysplasia (CIN 1), you likely won’t need treatment. Most of these cases go away on their own. Only about 1% of CIN 1 cases eventually progress to cervical cancer.

Your healthcare provider may recommend periodic Pap smears to watch for any worsening changes in abnormal cells.

CIN 2 and CIN 3 treatment

If the cervical dysplasia is more severe (CIN 2 or CIN 3), your provider may recommend removing or destroying the abnormal cells. These procedures cure cervical dysplasia in about 90% of all cases.

The procedures include:

Loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP): Your provider uses a small, electrically charged wire loop to remove tissue.
Cold knife cone biopsy (conization): Your provider removes a cone-shaped piece of tissue containing the abnormal cells.
Hysterectomy: Your provider surgically removes your uterus and cervix. This may be an option if cervical dysplasia persists or doesn’t improve after other procedures.

Each of these procedures has risks and potential complications. You and your provider will discuss which option is best for you.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Your healthcare provider will want to check the health of your cervix over time. They’ll want to make sure abnormal cells don’t grow back or become cancerous.

Following treatment, they may recommend that you have a follow-up Pap smear every three to six months for one to two years. Afterward, you may resume having yearly Pap smears.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

The outlook for cervical dysplasia with early diagnosis is excellent. Removing or destroying the abnormal cells significantly reduces your risk of cervical cancer. But these procedures come with certain side effects, like potential issues with pregnancy.

Prevention
----------
How can I prevent cervical dysplasia?

The only way to prevent cervical dysplasia is to avoid getting HPV. Prevention steps include:

The HPV vaccine: The HPV vaccine prevents HPV infections that can progress to cervical cancer or genital warts. It can’t treat pre-existing HPV or cervical dysplasia. But it may prevent infections from returning in some cases.
Abstinence or safer sex: You can prevent HPV infections by avoiding sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. You can also reduce your risk by practicing safer sex with condoms.
Regular Pap smears: Early detection can help prevent severe cervical dysplasia. You should have your first Pap smear at age 21. If your Pap smears remain normal, your provider might recommend repeat tests every three years until age 29. You should have co-testing (Pap Smear with HPV testing) every five years if you’re between the ages of 30 and 65. Testing can’t prevent cervical dysplasia, but it can help with early detection.
Don’t smoke or use tobacco products: There’s a greater chance that an HPV infection could become cervical dysplasia if you smoke or use tobacco.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Learning that you have precancerous cells on your cervix is stressful. But cervical dysplasia (CIN) doesn’t always lead to cancer. Early diagnosis and treatment can prevent cervical cancer from ever forming. Your healthcare provider will be by your side to answer any questions. Together, you’ll decide on a treatment plan that’s best for you.
