Chagas Disease (American Trypanosomiasis)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21876-chagas-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Chagas disease

Most people don’t have symptoms of the initial infection (acute phase). When they do, the symptoms are often mild. You may have:

Fever
Body aches
Fatigue
Headache
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Redness or rash in the bite area, sometimes turning into an ulcer (chagoma)
Severely swollen eyelid (Romañas sign)
Chronic Chagas infection

Without treatment, most people go on to have a chronic infection. About 30% to 40% of people with Chagas develop serious complications. Symptoms of complications include:

Chest pain
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath
Dizziness
Fainting
Fatigue
Difficulty swallowing
Constipation
Heartburn
Bloating
Chagas disease causes

The parasite Trypanosoma cruzi (T. cruzi) causes Chagas. Kissing bugs carry this parasite in their poop. These bugs tend to live in straw and mud. They feed off the blood of mammals, including humans, often at night when you’re sleeping. Here’s how a kissing bug bite can lead to Chagas:

The bug bites you and starts feeding.
When it feeds, it poops.
The poop (carrying the parasite) can get into the bite wound or your eyes, nose or mouth.
From there, the parasite can get into your bloodstream.
Once you have the infection, the parasites can reproduce and move from your blood to your tissues.

In addition to kissing bug bites, Chagas can spread through:

Vertical transmission (a fetus or baby may get the infection through the placenta, at birth or through breastfeeding)
Contaminated food
Blood transfusion or organ transplant (though blood and organ donors are now screened for Chagas)
What are the risk factors?

You might be at higher risk for Chagas disease if you:

Live in or used to live in a home with mud walls, a thatched (straw) roof or limited window screening in rural South America, Central America or Mexico
Live in an area where kissing bug bites are more common
Received a blood transfusion before universal blood screening for American trypanosomiasis began (between 1990 and 2007 for most countries)
Were born to someone who has or once had Chagas disease
Complications of kissing bug disease

Acute Chagas disease can sometimes cause myocarditis (heart muscle inflammation) or meningoencephalitis (brain inflammation). These can be life-threatening and require immediate medical attention. These issues are more common in children or people with compromised immune systems.

Chronic Chagas disease may cause serious or life-threatening complications that affect your heart, brain and digestive tract. You may have to manage these issues for the rest of your life. Chronic Chagas complications include:

Arrhythmia
Cardiac arrest
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Heart failure
Enlarged esophagus
Enlarged colon

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose Chagas disease

Healthcare providers diagnose a Chagas infection with a blood test. This looks for antibodies (protective proteins from your immune system) to the parasite. If you have symptoms of heart or digestive issues, you may also need additional tests, including:

Echocardiogram
Electrocardiogram (EKG/ECG)
X-ray or CT scan
Heart biopsy
Upper endoscopy
Colonoscopy

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is Chagas disease treated?

Providers use antiparasitic medications to treat Chagas, including benznidazole and nifurtimox. These are most effective when used in the acute phase or early in the chronic phase.

If you have complications of chronic Chagas, you might need additional treatments. These could include surgery, anticoagulants or antiarrhythmic medications.

Side effects of treatment

Benznidazole and nifurtimox can have unpleasant side effects that can keep people from taking them as long as they need to. These include:

Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Headaches
Dizziness
Anxiety and depression
Insomnia
Muscle pain

If you have these side effects, tell your provider. It’s important to take your medicine exactly as prescribed to treat this condition.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to your provider if you’ve lived in or visited an area where Chagas is common and:

You have heart or digestive conditions
You want to be screened (including before or during pregnancy)

It might help to ask your provider:

What are my treatment options?
How do I take this medication?
How long will I need to take this medication?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I follow up with you?
When should I go to the ER?

Go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of severe illness, including:

Severe headache
Stiff neck
Chest pain
Severe diarrhea or vomiting
Confusion or altered mental state

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have kissing bug disease?

If you treat Chagas early, you have a better chance of getting rid of the parasites before they can cause serious complications. You’ll need to take medications for a month or more.

Antiparasitics may be less effective at curing chronic infections, but they might reduce your risk of severe complications. If you have a chronic infection, you and your provider will need to monitor your health closely to treat any complications as soon as possible. You may need to manage certain health issues for the rest of your life.

What’s the outlook for this condition?

Chagas disease can lead to many different outcomes. A small number of people die from acute Chagas disease. On the other hand, a small number clear the infection without symptoms or treatment.

But most people who aren’t treated develop a chronic infection. Many can live for decades with a chronic infection without having complications. Some end up with life-threatening or long-lasting complications.

Prevention
----------
Can Chagas disease be prevented?

If you live in or visit areas where Chagas disease is common, you can reduce your risk by:

Using insecticide spray around houses and other structures
Making sure buildings and sleeping areas are well-sealed against bugs
Using netting to protect yourself from kissing bugs
Not drinking unpasteurized juices or eating food that could be contaminated with T. cruzi or triatomine poop

Consider being screened for Chagas if you’re pregnant or plan to become pregnant and you’ve been in an area where Chagas spreads.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Public health efforts — like screening donated blood, sealing living spaces and using insecticide — have reduced cases of Chagas disease. But many people might still have long-lasting illnesses and be at risk for serious complications.

If you think you could be at risk, talk to a healthcare provider about screening for Chagas disease. It can bring you peace of mind to know one way or another. If need be, a healthcare provider can help you find treatment options and look out for complications.
