CNS (Central Nervous System) Vasculitis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/cns-vasculitis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of CNS vasculitis

Symptoms of CNS vasculitis can include:

Severe headaches that last a long time
Forgetfulness or confusion
Tingling, numbness or changes in your sense of touch (sensations)
A feeling of weakness
Worsening vision (including blurred vision or double vision)
Seizures
Encephalopathy (brain swelling) that can cause mood or personality changes or make you faint (pass out)
CNS vasculitis complications

If you have vasculitis, your blood vessels swell and thicken. This makes it harder for blood to flow through them. Over time, the inflammation from CNS vasculitis can damage your brain or spinal cord and cause serious, potentially life-threatening complications, including:

Strokes
Transient ischemic attacks (“mini-strokes”)
Brain aneurysms

These issues are all medical emergencies. Go to the emergency room or call 911 (or your local emergency services number) if you think you’re experiencing symptoms that might be a stroke or a brain aneurysm rupture.

CNS vasculitis causes

CNS vasculitis is an autoimmune disease. Autoimmune diseases happen when your immune system accidentally attacks your body instead of protecting it.

People with primary CNS vasculitis develop it without a known cause or trigger (idiopathically).

Secondary CNS vasculitis usually develops alongside (secondary to) conditions that cause inflammation in your body. Other autoimmune diseases and certain infections can trigger it, including:

Lupus
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA)
Microscopic polyangiitis
Behçet’s syndrome
Sjögren’s syndrome
Viral infections (like Epstein-Barr virus and varicella-zoster virus)
Bacterial infections (like tuberculosis and syphilis)
Risk factors of central nervous system vasculitis

Anyone can develop CNS vasculitis, but it’s more common in males. It’s most likely to develop in people around age 50, but can occur at any age.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How do healthcare providers diagnose CNS vasculitis?

A healthcare provider will diagnose CNS vasculitis with a physical exam and some tests. They’ll ask you about your symptoms and when you first noticed them. Tell your provider if the symptoms come and go (recur) or if certain times of day or activities make them better or worse.

Diagnosing CNS vasculitis can be a differential diagnosis. This means your provider will probably use a few tests to rule out other, more common conditions before diagnosing you with CNS vasculitis. You may need:

MRI
CT scan
Angiogram
Biopsies

You might need to see a rheumatologist — a healthcare provider who specializes in treating inflammatory diseases.

CNS vasculitis markers

Markers are signs of a disease that your provider can look for in your blood or body using laboratory tests. Tests your provider may use to check you for markers of CNS vasculitis include:

Blood tests to look for signs of anemia
An ESR test to look for markers that indicate inflammation in your body
A C-reactive protein (CRP) test to look for inflammation markers that your liver releases
A lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to examine your cerebral spinal fluid for a high white blood cell count

Management and Treatment
------------------------
CNS vasculitis treatments

Your provider will suggest treatments that manage inflammation. The most important part of treating CNS vasculitis is reducing how much it damages your brain or spinal cord. Most people need a combination of corticosteroids and immunosuppressants.

You might need higher doses of medication at first. Then (usually after a few months), your provider may reduce how often you receive infusions or injections of medication. They’ll adjust your medications to help you reach a remission stage — a long period where you have very mild (or no) symptoms.

If you have secondary CNS vasculitis, you may need other treatments to manage the condition that triggered it. Your provider will tell you what to expect.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Monitor the symptoms you’re experiencing and keep track of any changes you notice. Talk to your provider if you notice any changes, especially if it feels like symptoms are happening more often or more severely. Tell your provider if it feels like a treatment isn’t working (or isn’t as effective as it used to be).

Your provider will tell you how often you’ll need regular follow-up appointments, blood tests or additional screenings.

Go to the emergency room or call 911 (or your local emergency number) if you’re experiencing any of the following symptoms:

You think you might be experiencing stroke or brain aneurysm rupture symptoms.
You can’t breathe.
Your vision suddenly gets worse or you have sudden vision loss.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have central nervous system vasculitis?

There’s no cure for CNS vasculitis. Many people are able to enter extended periods of remission once they find the right medications that work for them. Some people are in remission for months or years before experiencing symptoms again.

CNS vasculitis doesn’t usually affect how long you can expect to live (your life expectancy). But this can be hard to estimate. That’s because CNS vasculitis can cause severe complications like strokes and aneurysms. People who experience those complications are much more likely to die sooner than usual.

Talk to your healthcare provider if you’re worried about your health or how much having CNS vasculitis can affect it.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Any condition that affects your central nervous system (CNS) can be scary. And that’s especially true when you find out your immune system might be damaging your brain and spinal cord. The good news is that many people with CNS vasculitis find a combination of medications that manage it. Once you find treatments that work, your provider will help you minimize how much the symptoms affect your life.

Remember, asking questions about your health is never bad. Talk to your provider about all your concerns. They’ll answer any questions you have and help you feel confident that you know what’s going on inside your body and how you can manage it.
