Colic
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/10823-colic

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Colicky babies have repeated periods of inconsolable crying without apparent reason. Symptoms of colic in babies can vary.

Colic symptoms

Colicky infants are healthy babies. But they have repeated periods of crying — without an obvious reason — and you can’t comfort them. These crying episodes last for hours without stopping.

Signs of colic in babies can vary. Colicky babies usually get fussy at the end of the day. But the crying can happen at any time. It can be hard to comfort your baby during these stretches of time. There’s no link between these periods of fussiness and hunger or discomfort. Although your infant is fussy and cries, they continue to eat well and gain weight.

Symptoms of colic in an infant may include:

Clenched fists
Legs curled up over their tummy
Arched back
A hard, swollen belly
Passing of gas
Active grimacing or a “painful” look on their face
Face turning bright red or a deeper shade after long periods of crying
What causes colic in babies?

Researchers don’t know the exact reason babies get colic. But several factors may play a role.

Baby colic causes may include:

Belly (abdominal) pain or discomfort from gas due to air swallowed while nursing or crying
Reflux (bringing up) of stomach contents
Food allergies
Milk-protein intolerance
Underfeeding or overfeeding
Sensory overload
An early form of migraine headache
Emotional reaction to frustration, fear or excitement
Underdeveloped digestive system
Complications of colic

Newborn colic can take a toll on first-time and experienced parents alike. The overwhelming stress that the condition can place on caregivers can lead to postpartum depression and shaken baby syndrome.

No matter how impatient or angry you become, don’t shake your baby. Shaking an infant can cause blindness, brain damage or even death. Let your healthcare provider know if you’re having feelings of depression or trouble dealing with your emotions. They can recommend ways to help.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How do you know if your newborn has colic?

You can usually figure out your fussy infant has colic by the pattern of their symptoms. It’ll help if you keep a record of:

When your baby’s crying spells occur
When your baby sleeps
What your baby eats and how often
When your baby poops

If you go to your baby’s pediatrician, they may do a physical exam. This is to rule out a physical condition as the cause of your baby’s fussiness. These conditions may include:

Esophageal reflux
Infection
Allergy

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How do you soothe a colicky baby?

There’s no cure, but there are steps you can take to help ease colic in newborns. You may try the following baby colic treatments.

Feeding your baby

If you’re breastfeeding your baby, keep track of all the foods and drinks you consume in a food journal. You pass on everything you eat to your baby, and it can affect them. You may have to stop eating:

Milk products
Caffeine
Chocolate
Nuts
Onions
Cabbage
Any other potentially irritating foods

Ask your healthcare provider if there are any medications you should avoid.

If you’re feeding your baby formula, you may want to try a different brand of formula. Infants can be sensitive to certain proteins in formulas. Talk with your baby’s pediatrician about switching to a specific kind. You can also try feeding your baby smaller meals more often. But avoid feeding your baby too quickly or too much.

Comforting your baby

You may want to introduce a pacifier to your crying newborn. Some breastfed babies will actively refuse it. But it can provide instant relief for others. You could also try infant colic drops or a natural remedy like Colic Calm®. These colic medications for newborns can help relieve gas.

Other ways you can help your colicky baby include:

Skin-to-skin contact
Rocking, either in a rocking chair or in your arms as you sway from side to side
Gently stroking your baby’s head or patting their back or chest
Swaddling by wrapping them snugly in a receiving blanket
Singing or talking
Playing soft music
Walking with them in your arms or a stroller
Riding in the car with your baby properly secured in their car safety seat
Rhythmic noise and vibration
Burping them to relieve any trapped gas bubbles
Warm baths, which most babies like, but not all
Using quiet voices and turning off electronics like TVs and phones
When should I call my baby’s healthcare provider?

Call your baby’s healthcare provider if your baby stops gaining weight, shows dramatic changes in behavior or has any of the following symptoms:

Fever
Forceful vomiting (especially green in color or with blood in it)
Diarrhea
Blood in their poop

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
How long does colic last?

Although a bout of colic can be frightening to watch — especially for first-time parents — it isn’t harmful to your baby’s health. Babies with the condition will eventually outgrow it. Typically, colic ends by the time your baby is 3 to 4 months old.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
How do I take care of myself if my baby has colic?

Thankfully, colic is a short-lived issue that doesn’t have any long-term effects on your baby. But that doesn’t make it any easier on you. It can be hard to look after a newborn who won’t stop crying. You may be feeling overwhelmed or frustrated. Your emotions are valid.

But if your baby has colic and your emotions are becoming too hard to handle, reach out to a trusted friend or family member. Ask them to watch over your baby while you take a break. Get out of the house. Clear your head. Give yourself time to calm down.

If you don’t have a trusted caregiver, place your baby in a safe place (like their crib) and leave the room. Your baby will be OK for a few minutes while you walk down the hall and take a breather. Remember, the crying won’t last forever.

What types of colic can adults get?

When you hear the word “colic,” you may think of the kind infants get. But adults can get colic, too. Adult colic refers to pain in your intestinal or urinary system. Types of colic in adults include:

Biliary colic. This is abdominal pain that occurs due to a blockage in one of the ducts of your biliary tree.
Renal colic. This is intense pain between your ribs and hips (flank). It occurs due to a blockage in part of your urinary tract.
Intestinal colic. This is painful cramps in your abdomen due to a blockage in your large intestine or small intestine.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
All babies cry, but if your baby is crying for hours on end, they may have colic. Researchers don’t know exactly why colic happens. But it has nothing to do with your parenting. It can be frustrating, especially for new parents trying to figure out how to take care of an infant. If you need help, reach out to a trusted friend or family member for a break. If you don’t have any trusted caregivers nearby, reach out to a healthcare provider. They can help you carefully manage this overwhelming bump in the road of parenthood.
