Color Blindness
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/11604-color-blindness

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of color blindness

Not having full color vision is the main symptom. But with most types, it’s more subtle than completely not seeing some colors. If you have color vision deficiency, you might have trouble:

Telling the difference between certain colors
Seeing the full brightness or depth of colors
Seeing shades or variations of the same color
What do people with color blindness see?

It can be hard to notice color vision deficiency, especially if you were born with it. To you, that’s just what colors look like because they always have. You might not know you have it until an eye doctor diagnoses you.

This is especially true in children. Kids probably won’t know or notice anything is off about how they see and understand color. If your child has color vision deficiency, you might notice them:

Avoiding arts or crafts that require them to use colors
Using a colored crayon, marker or paint that’s different from what they mean to use (like making the sky green or grass blue)
Smelling foods before eating them, even if it’s a dish they’ve tasted before
Struggling to group objects together based on color or how they look
What causes color blindness?

Color vision deficiency is usually something you’re born with (inherited color blindness). It happens because of a genetic change that you inherit from your biological parents. That’s where it gets its name. A genetic change can cause missing or malfunctioning cones that lead to color vision deficiency.

Acquired color blindness happens when you develop it later in life. This happens when something damages your eyes and the cones in your retinas. Some possible causes include:

Eye conditions like age-related macular degeneration, glaucoma or cataracts
Conditions that affect your brain or nervous system like diabetes-related retinopathy
Environmental factors (something about where you live, work or spend a lot of time that damages your eyes)
Eye injuries or another kind of trauma that damages the connection between your eyes and brain
Side effects from certain medications

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose color vision deficiency

An eye doctor will diagnose color blindness with an eye exam and vision tests. They’ll examine your eyes and retinas and check your vision. Tell your provider when you first noticed symptoms or thought something might have changed in your color vision.

Color vision tests are quick, in-office tests that will diagnose a specific type and its severity. You’ll look at a series of images on cards or a computer screen and tell your provider what you see.

Your child’s pediatrician will check their eyes during well-baby checkups. They’ll tell you when your child should have their first eye exam.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Are there color blindness treatments?

There aren’t treatments for inherited color vision deficiency. If you have acquired color blindness, there’s a chance your color vision will return after you treat its cause. But the damage in your cones may permanently affect your color vision.

Color blindness glasses can help some people see more colors, or more vivid colors. They might be able to amplify some of your natural color vision. But they can’t treat or cure the cause of color vision deficiency. Ask your eye doctor if they may be a good option for you.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have color vision deficiency?

Most mild types won’t affect your health or ability to participate in your usual routine. More severe cases (like achromatopsia) can increase your risk of complications and other eye issues.

Talk to your eye doctor about what to expect. They’ll tell you how often you’ll need follow-up eye exams. If your child has color blindness, ask your doctor what you can do to help them with school.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Finding out you have color vision deficiency can be confusing. On one hand, it can be a relief to know what’s making you have a hard time seeing things other people easily can. But at the same time, it can be frustrating to learn you’re experiencing the world around you differently from others. Talk to your eye doctor. They’ll answer any questions you have and help you find any resources you may need to participate in all your usual activities.
