Colpocephaly
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21990-colpocephaly

Overview
--------
What is colpocephaly?

Colpocephaly is a condition present at birth in which a portion of the fluid-filled spaces (ventricles) in the back of your child’s brain are larger than expected.

Your child’s brain has four ventricles filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This is the fluid that surrounds their brain and spinal cord. Ventricles help their brain circulate and drain CSF. Your child has one lateral ventricle on each side of their brain. The portion of the lateral ventricles that extends toward the back of their brain, or the occipital lobe, is called the occipital horn of the ventricle.

Colpocephaly isn’t common. It usually happens when surrounding brain tissue hasn’t developed as expected. Symptoms can vary depending on brain tissue development. By itself, it’s not typically a life-threatening condition.

Colpocephaly is a type of cephalic disorder. These are conditions that target the development of your body’s brain and spinal cord, which make up the central nervous system.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of colpocephaly?

The signs and symptoms of colpocephaly include:

Difficulty with problem-solving
Difficulties with attention and hyperactivity
Speech delay
Intellectual disability
Challenges with coordination and movement
Hearing issues
Muscle spasms
Seizures
Small head size (microcephaly)
Vision problems

Symptoms affect each person differently. In some cases, your child may not have any noticeable symptoms. If symptoms are severe, it may affect your child’s ability to be independent and safely do things on their own.

What causes colpocephaly?

Colpocephaly happens when certain parts of your child’s brain don’t develop fully. Specifically, the middle portion of the brain that helps the two halves of the brain communicate, called the corpus callosum, doesn’t fully form. This is called dysgenesis or agenesis of the corpus callosum. Because of this, there’s extra space that gets filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

Researchers aren’t sure exactly why this happens and there are likely several underlying causes. Some cases may pass genetically in your biological family. Others may happen due to genetic variants or new changes in DNA.

What are the risk factors for colpocephaly?

Studies suggest the following pregnancy complications may put you more at risk of having a child with colpocephaly:

Alcohol use disorder during pregnancy
Infection during pregnancy (such as toxoplasmosis)
Malnutrition
Decreased blood flow to the placenta

If you’re pregnant or planning on expanding your family, talk with a pregnancy care provider. They can help you and the fetus stay healthy.

What conditions can happen with colpocephaly?

It’s common for children to have a colpocephaly diagnosis in addition to another underlying condition like:

Cerebellar atrophy
Coloboma
Hydrocephalus
Lissencephaly
Microgyria or macrogyria (small or large brain folds)
Myelomeningocele
Neurofibromatosis
Optic nerve hypoplasia

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is colpocephaly diagnosed?

A healthcare provider may suspect colpocephaly during a prenatal ultrasound. An official diagnosis usually happens after your child is born, when more accurate imaging of your child’s brain can be obtained. Your child’s provider will perform a physical exam and a neurological exam and learn more about their family medical history.

They may recommend the following tests to make a diagnosis:

CT scan
MRI
Genetic testing
Can a colpocephaly diagnosis happen to adults?

An adult may receive a diagnosis for colpocephaly later in life if they have a very mild case. This is extremely rare.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Is colpocephaly curable?

There isn’t a cure for colpocephaly. But healthcare providers can treat some of the symptoms the condition causes. Talk with your child’s provider to learn more about treatments that can help.

How is colpocephaly treated?

Colpocephaly treatment focuses on symptom management. Your child’s healthcare provider may recommend:

Participating in special education programs at school
Speech therapy
Physical and/or occupational therapy
Wearing glasses
Using hearing aids
Taking antiseizure medication, if seizures occur

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What’s the prognosis for colpocephaly?

Your child’s outlook depends on how much of the brain tissue didn’t develop, and if any additional brain structures didn’t develop as expected. Each child’s outlook is as unique as they are. Talk to their provider to learn more about what you can expect.

What’s the life expectancy for colpocephaly?

Colpocephaly itself isn’t life-threatening. If colpocephaly happens with other brain conditions, it may lead to disability and may affect your child’s outlook. Your child’s provider will give you the most accurate information about your child’s situation.

Prevention
----------
Can colpocephaly be prevented?

There’s no definite way to prevent colpocephaly. But you can take steps to have a healthy pregnancy. Talk with your provider about the prenatal care that’s right for you.

Living With
-----------
When should I see a healthcare provider?

Contact your child’s provider if you notice irregularities with their behavior or developmental delays. You know your child best, so let their provider know if anything doesn’t seem right.

If your child has a seizure for the first time, contact emergency services.

What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

You may have a lot of questions for your child’s healthcare provider like:

How can I best care for my child?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I be concerned about changes in behavior?
What therapies do you recommend for my child?
What educational resources can help my child?

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Learning that your baby has colpocephaly can be difficult. You might be worried about what your child’s future may look like or how this condition will affect their well-being. You may also wonder if they’ll need to enroll in special education programs at school one day or work closely with different types of therapists throughout their lives. But each person’s experience with colpocephaly is a little different, based on your child’s specific needs.

Your child’s care team will work with you to keep your child healthy and manage symptoms. Don’t hesitate to reach out to your child’s providers if you need assistance or support along the way. They’re a helpful resource and will make sure your child has everything they need.
