COVID-19 (Coronavirus)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/21214-coronavirus-covid-19

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of COVID-19

COVID symptoms include:

Fever
Sore throat
Headache
Tiredness (fatigue)
Body aches
Chills
Stuffy or runny nose
Cough
Shortness of breath
Loss of or altered sense of smell and taste
Difficulty thinking and focusing (brain fog)
Digestive symptoms, like diarrhea, nausea and vomiting

Some people have no symptoms but can still spread the virus.

COVID causes

SARS-CoV-2 virus causes COVID. It’s a type of coronavirus, a group of viruses that also cause common colds. But this isn’t the first time a coronavirus has caused serious illness. SARS, a severe respiratory disease that spread between 2002 and 2004, was also a coronavirus.

COVID spreads through respiratory droplets. This means you can get it from coughing, sneezing and talking. You might also get it from touching contaminated objects and surfaces.

Risk factors

You’re at an increased risk of being hospitalized with COVID-19 if you:

Are over 65
Are pregnant
Smoke or used to smoke
Have received a solid organ or stem cell transplant

You’re also at an increased risk if you have:

A blood disorder such as sickle cell disease or thalassemia
Cancer
Cerebrovascular disease, such as stroke
Chronic conditions that affect your lungs, kidneys, liver or heart
Congenital conditions like cerebral palsy or Down syndrome
Diabetes (Type 1 or Type 2)
HIV/AIDS or a compromised (weakened) immune system
Mental health conditions, such as depression or schizophrenia spectrum disorders
Neurological conditions, like dementia or Alzheimer’s disease
Obesity
Substance use disorders such as alcohol, opioid or cocaine use disorder
Tuberculosis
Complications of COVID

COVID can cause serious complications, even if you don’t feel very sick. These include:

Pneumonia
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
Blood clots, including pulmonary embolism (PE) or deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Heart inflammation (myocarditis/pericarditis)
Cardiac arrest
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C)
Long COVID, a condition where pain, extreme fatigue and other symptoms last for months or years after a COVID infection

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose COVID

Healthcare providers diagnose COVID by swabbing your nose with a soft-tipped stick and testing it with a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT), like a PCR test. You can also test at home with a rapid antigen test.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is COVID treated?

COVID can be treated with antiviral medications. These include nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (Paxlovid®), remdesivir (Veklury®) and molnupiravir (Lagevrio™). When taken within the first five days, antivirals can help you feel better and reduce your risk of severe illness and long COVID.

If you’re severely ill and hospitalized, your healthcare provider might treat you with:

Monoclonal antibody treatment
Supplemental oxygen
Corticosteroids
Mechanical ventilation
Recovery time

Many people recover from symptoms like congestion, sore throat and cough in about two weeks. But tiredness, shortness of breath and other symptoms can linger for weeks or even months afterwards.

How long are you contagious with COVID?

You can be contagious with COVID from a couple of days before your symptoms start to about eight to 10 days after.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you have symptoms of COVID, talk to your provider early to see if you should take an antiviral. See your provider if your symptoms last longer than four weeks, especially if they aren’t improving.

When should I go to the ER?

Call 911 or get to an emergency room if you experience:

Difficulty breathing
Chest pain
Severe leg pain, warmth or other signs of deep vein thrombosis
Blue or gray skin, lips or nails (cyanosis)
Confusion

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have COVID?

The outlook for COVID is different for everyone. Some people have only mild symptoms. Some get very sick and need to be hospitalized. Sometimes, your symptoms seem to get better and then get much worse. Always seek emergency medical attention for severe symptoms, no matter when they happen.

Is there anything I can do to feel better?

Over-the-counter medications can help ease some of the symptoms of COVID, though they won’t treat the virus itself. If your child has COVID, talk to their pediatrician before giving them medications to make sure they’re safe to take.

Prevention
----------
Can COVID be prevented?

Making sure you’re up to date with a current COVID vaccine is the best way to reduce your risk of getting sick with COVID — and reduce your risk of severe illness if you do get sick. You’re also less likely to get long COVID if you’re vaccinated.

You can also reduce your risk by washing your hands frequently and wearing a mask when COVID is spreading. Be courteous and avoid being around others if you’re sick or might’ve been exposed to someone who’s sick.

If you have a compromised immune system, the monoclonal antibody medication pemivibart (Pemgarda™) might be an option. A provider gives it to you in an IV (through your vein) to reduce your risk of getting COVID (pre-exposure prophylaxis).

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
How long should I quarantine after a positive COVID test with symptoms?

According to current CDC recommendations in the U.S., you should self-isolate until you’ve met both of the following criteria:

It’s been five days since your symptoms first appeared and your symptoms are improving.
You haven’t had a fever for 24 hours and you haven’t used fever-lowering medications during this time.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
The beginnings of the COVID pandemic might seem far away at this point. Remembering things like elbow bumps and virtual birthday parties might even seem quaint. But COVID had a devastating effect on the world — and it seems to be here to stay. Vaccinations and antiviral medications can help reduce your risk of severe illness.
