Cystic Lung Disease
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/cystic-lung-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of cystic lung disease

Some people with cystic lung disease have no symptoms. But those who do have symptoms could experience:

Shortness of breath
Cough
Wheezing
Chest pain
Frequent lung infections

Depending on the cause, you may have additional symptoms.

Cystic lung disease causes

There are many causes of cystic lung diseases, including:

Changes to your DNA — either ones that you’re born with or that happen later in life
Congenital lung conditions (ones you’re born with), like bronchogenic cysts and pulmonary sequestration
Cancers that start in or spread to your lungs
Lung infections
Interstitial lung diseases
Smoking
Autoimmune disorders
Amyloidosis and other diseases that cause abnormal proteins to build up in parts of your body
Complications of cystic lung disease

A collapsed lung is the most common complication of cystic lung diseases. You may also get fluid around your lungs.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose cystic lung disease

Healthcare providers can see cystic lung disease on imaging, like chest X-rays and high-resolution CT scans (HRCT). During pregnancy, your provider might see cysts on a prenatal ultrasound. Your provider might also recommend:

Lung function tests to understand how well your lungs are working
Blood tests to look for specific proteins, see how well your organs are working and check for other clues that help diagnose a specific cause
A lung biopsy to look at tissue samples under a microscope
Genetic testing to diagnose conditions that cause changes in your DNA

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How are cystic lung diseases treated?

Treatment for cystic lung disease depends on the type you have. Some treatments could include:

Inhaled bronchodilators
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Oxygen therapy
Surgery
Lung transplant (in cases of severe or progressive disease)

There are also medications that treat specific diseases. If you’ve had a collapsed lung, your provider may recommend pleurodesis. This is a procedure that attaches your lung to your chest cavity to prevent lung collapse from happening again.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to your healthcare provider if you or your child has symptoms like a chronic cough or shortness of breath. These symptoms can have many causes, but it’s always important to get them checked out, especially if they’re getting worse over time.

If you have a cystic lung disease diagnosis, be sure to attend follow-up appointments. Let your provider know how you’re managing any kind of treatment you’re on and if you have new or worsening symptoms.

It might be helpful to ask your provider:

Does this need to be treated?
What are my treatment options?
How will I feel after treatment?
Will this get worse over time?
What symptoms should I look out for?
When should I follow up with you?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
Is cystic lung disease serious?

Some cystic lung diseases, like LAM, can be serious because of the damage they do to your lungs. Some need to be watched closely because they can cause problems outside of your lungs that appear later in life. Others may not cause serious symptoms or can get better with treatment. Talk to your provider about what to expect in your specific situation.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Cystic lung disease can have many causes and outcomes. Your provider will be able to tell you more about your (or your child’s) specific condition and the treatment options available. Don’t hesitate to bring up questions or concerns you have.
