Vaginal Yeast Infection
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/5019-vaginal-yeast-infection

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of a vaginal yeast infection

Common signs of a yeast infection include:

Itching or burning in or around your vagina
Thick, white discharge that looks like cottage cheese
Redness and swelling around your vulva and vagina
Small cuts or tiny cracks in the skin of your vulva
Burning when you pee
Pain during sex

Symptoms of a yeast infection can feel like symptoms of other conditions that affect your vagina. Contact a healthcare provider if you have any of these symptoms so they can examine you.

Vaginal yeast infection causes

An overgrowth of a fungus called Candida causes a vaginal yeast infection.

Fungus lives in several places within your body. It’s supposed to be there. Other bacteria help keep its growth under control. But certain factors throw off this balance. When this happens, Candida multiplies out of control. This leads to a yeast infection.

Some specific causes are:

Taking antibiotics. Antibiotics that treat infections in your body kill the good bacteria in your vagina. The balance shifts without good bacteria, leading to a yeast infection.
Pregnancy and hormones. Anything that disrupts or changes your hormones can disrupt the balance of Candida in your vagina. This includes being pregnant, using birth control pills and normal changes during your menstrual cycle.
Being immunocompromised. Having a disease that weakens your immune system can make you more susceptible to yeast infections.
Having unmanaged diabetes. The extra sugar in your pee helps yeast grow and multiply. Unmanaged diabetes can also weaken your immune system.

Other things that increase your risk:

Staying in wet clothes or swimsuits
Wearing tight, non-breathable clothing
Using scented tampons, sprays, soaps or deodorants
Is a yeast infection contagious?

Yeast infections aren't considered contagious, but in rare cases, you may pass one to a female partner. It’s uncommon to pass it to a male partner.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose yeast infections

Your healthcare provider may suspect a yeast infection after hearing your symptoms. They may need to take a sample of discharge from your vagina to confirm a yeast infection, though. The combination of your symptoms and the discharge sample will tell your healthcare provider what type of yeast infection you have and how to treat it.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How you should treat a vaginal yeast infection.

How are yeast infections treated?

Antifungal medications treat most vaginal yeast infections. They work by fighting yeast overgrowth in your body. Medications are either oral (usually given in one dose of fluconazole by mouth) or topical (used daily for up to seven days). You may apply topical medications to your vulvar area or place them inside your vagina (suppository) using an applicator. Some common antifungal medications are miconazole (Monistat®) and terconazole.

Your healthcare provider will prescribe the best treatment based on your symptoms and how serious the infection is. Your healthcare provider will give you information about each form of medication and directions on how to use each one properly. You should finish the medication completely to make sure the infection doesn’t come back.

If you’re taking medication for a yeast infection, you shouldn’t have sex until you’re finished with treatment. Sex can cause more irritation, and certain antifungal medications can weaken the materials used in condoms and diaphragms.

Can I use over-the-counter treatment?

Sometimes, you can treat a vaginal yeast infection with over-the-counter medicines. But you may want to avoid this if you aren’t completely sure you have a yeast infection. It’s usually best to talk to a healthcare provider to make sure you’re buying the right medicine.

How long do yeast infections last?

Most yeast infections clear up with medication after a few days, but it may take a full week. More severe cases may last longer and take longer to treat. Make sure you use the medication as directed and don’t stop taking it too soon, or the infection may come back.

Will it go away by itself?

No, a yeast infection can’t go away on its own. Only a medication that destroys fungus will treat a vaginal yeast infection.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to your healthcare provider if you get more than four yeast infections in a year. They may want to order tests to determine what’s causing them. Your provider will use your test results to make sure you receive the right treatment. Managing the reason for the infection can help prevent future vaginal yeast infections.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
Can I prevent yeast infections?

You can often prevent vaginal yeast infections by making a few lifestyle changes. These changes can include:

Not douching (douching can kill bacteria that control fungus)
Avoiding vaginal sprays or deodorants
Not using scented tampons or pads
Changing out of wet clothing as soon as possible (bathing suits or gym clothes)
Wearing cotton underwear and loose-fitting clothes
Using water-based sexual lubricants
Keeping your blood sugar levels in a healthy range (if you have diabetes)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Yeast infections are a very common fungal infection that most women will have in their lifetime. It’s highly treatable with medication, some of which are available for purchase at your local drug store without a prescription. Even though you may know the signs of a vaginal yeast infection, it’s important to get examined by your healthcare provider. They can recommend the best treatment based on the type of yeast infection you have and how severe it is.
