Vein of Galen Malformation
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/vein-of-galen-malformation-vogm

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Vein of Galen malformation symptoms

Early signs and symptoms of a vein of Galen malformation among infants may include:

Growth faltering
Large head size (macrocephaly)
Seizures
Swollen, visible veins on their scalp

Older children who have less severe cases and don’t receive a diagnosis as an infant may have developmental delays and persistent headaches.

What are the complications of a vein of Galen malformation?

Severe and life-threatening complications of VOGMs may include:

Brain bleed
Congestive heart failure
Hydrocephalus
Pulmonary hypertension
Stroke
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Vein of Galen malformation causes

The exact cause isn’t well known. Researchers suggest the RASA1 or EPHB4 genetic variants may be involved.

It’s not possible to know for certain the genetic outcomes of a pregnancy before it happens. But a genetic counselor can help you learn more about your risk of having a child with a genetic condition. And they can help you learn more about how a condition might affect you and your family.

Healthcare providers do know that there’s no way to prevent this condition. There isn’t anything you did — or didn’t do — during pregnancy to cause it.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How a doctor diagnoses a vein of Galen malformation

A healthcare provider may suspect a vein of Galen malformation during a pregnancy ultrasound in the third trimester. The vein of Galen should look like a tube. Your provider may notice the tube instead has a large, ballooned section on it where it expanded.

After your baby is born, your child’s provider will perform a physical exam and review their symptoms. Their provider may use a stethoscope to listen to the sound of blood flow in your child’s head. They’ll listen for a pulsating sound (bruit) that may indicate that blood is moving faster than expected.

A computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirms a diagnosis. Imaging tests will give your child’s provider a better look at the malformation and other surrounding brain structures. They can review where it is and how big it is. These tests can also help your child’s care team plan for treatment.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is a vein of Galen malformation treated?

Embolization treats a vein of Galen malformation. This is a surgical procedure to stop blood flow to the arteries that feed into the vein. Here’s what you could expect during embolization:

An anesthesiologist will give your child general anesthesia. They’ll be asleep during the procedure.
A provider will make a very small incision — usually in your child’s groin — to insert a flexible tube (catheter) into your child’s artery.
They’ll carefully move the tube through your child’s artery to the treatment area in their brain.
A provider will inject an embolic agent (a material to close the openings) to stop blood flow in a specific area.
They’ll remove the catheter and bandage the small incision.

In some cases, surgery may be delayed until your child reaches at least 6 months to 1 year of age. This is to make sure that certain areas of your child’s body develop enough to handle the procedure. Your child will receive supportive care or medications to manage their symptoms. This also prevents complications before surgery.

When should I take my child to see a healthcare provider?

If your child has a VOGM, their provider will let you know what symptoms to look out for, especially when they’re cleared to leave the hospital after treatment. This could include:

Behavior changes (fussy or lethargic)
Fever
Seizures
Swelling
Vomiting

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What’s the prognosis for a vein of Galen malformation?

With endovascular treatment (embolization), many children have an improved outlook. Your child’s care team will explain the risks and possible complications of the procedure so you can make an informed decision about their treatment.

If treatment is successful, your child might need another procedure in the future or close monitoring as they grow. This may include several follow-up appointments with specialists, in addition to their regular check-ups with a pediatrician. Some children don’t experience any long-term complications after receiving treatment, but this varies from child to child.

Vein of Galen malformation life expectancy

Treatment may significantly improve your child’s life expectancy. Because without it, some types of VOGM are fatal.

A lot of factors go into determining your child’s life expectancy, like the severity of the condition and whether surgery is a safe option. Your child’s situation may or may not reflect statistics. Their healthcare provider is the best person to speak with to learn more about what you can expect.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
As a new parent, the first moments with your baby may not be what you were expecting if they have a vein of Galen malformation. Maybe you’ve known about the diagnosis for months and delivered in a large, academic medical center with expert surgeons who were waiting to provide care for your baby. Or maybe your baby developed symptoms at home and you’ve rushed to the hospital. No matter how you got here, it’s a stressful time.

Treatment, while it comes with risks, may improve your child’s life expectancy. It’s easy to worry about what might happen next. But know that your child’s care team will be with you every step of the way. You’ll get to know your child’s providers well, as they’ll need continual monitoring and follow-up care throughout their life. Their providers can offer comfort and support and answer any questions you might have.
