Shigellosis (Shigella Infection)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/17826-shigellosis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
Shigellosis is an infection with Shigella bacteria. It causes diarrhea and other digestive symptoms.

You might get Shigella from being around someone who has the infection — like if you touch the same surfaces or if you’re taking care of them while they’re sick. It may also contaminate bodies of water (think lakes and rivers) or foods you eat.

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of shigellosis

Shigellosis commonly causes diarrhea. This can be watery or bloody. It might also contain mucus or pus. Other symptoms include:

Fever
Stomach pain and cramps
Vomiting

This combination of symptoms is also called bacillary dysentery.

You can also have a Shigella infection without symptoms. Even then, you can still be contagious.

Shigellosis causes

Shigella bacteria cause shigellosis. You get it through contact with infected poop. It most commonly spreads through close contact with other people, especially in daycares or other places where people live or work closely with others. You can also get it from:

Lakes, rivers or other natural bodies of water: You might swallow contaminated water while swimming or doing water sports.
Contaminated food: Food can become contaminated with Shigella if someone with shigellosis prepares it without washing their hands well enough. Or if it’s washed or grown in contaminated water.
Direct contact with poop: This could happen while changing diapers, during sex or while caring for someone with shigellosis.
Risk factors

People who are at a higher risk of Shigella infections include:

Gay and bisexual males and men who have sex with men
Kids younger than 5
Those who live in or travel to areas without clean, running water
Those who have a weakened immune system
Those who are experiencing homelessness
Complications of shigellosis

Shigella infections can sometimes lead to complications. These include:

Dehydration, a severe loss of fluids that can cause your body not to work properly
Bacterial infections in your blood that can spread to other parts of your body
Seizures, abnormal electrical activity in your brain
Reactive arthritis, joint inflammation triggered by an infection
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, a condition that damages the blood vessels in your kidneys

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose shigellosis

A healthcare provider can sometimes diagnose shigellosis based on your symptoms. They might test a sample of your poop (stool) to confirm.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

If your symptoms are manageable, you can usually take care of yourself at home until you feel better. Drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration. Ask your provider before taking anti-diarrheal medications. They can sometimes make symptoms worse and make the illness go on longer than it needs to.

In severe cases, you may need antibiotics to treat shigellosis. Your provider may prescribe ciprofloxacin or azithromycin. Take all antibiotics as prescribed, even if you start feeling better. If you become dehydrated, you’ll need treatment with fluids in the hospital.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Talk to a healthcare provider if you or someone in your family has diarrhea, especially if it lasts a long time. Go to the emergency room if you have severe diarrhea, vomiting, cramping or bloody diarrhea.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have shigellosis?

Most people with shigellosis feel better within about a week. But severe cases can last several weeks. Sometimes, it can take a few months for your body to feel like it’s returned to normal.

Prevention
----------
Can I prevent shigellosis?

You can reduce your risk of a Shigella infection with these safety measures:

Wash your hands with soap and water thoroughly and often, especially before and after eating, after using the bathroom and changing diapers, and before preparing food.
Wash fruits and vegetables thoroughly.
Avoid swallowing water in pools, lakes or ponds.
Throw away soiled diapers in a lined garbage can with a lid.
Drink and cook with bottled water if you’re in an area where you’re unsure whether the water is safe.
If you or your partner has diarrhea, wait a week after recovery to have sex.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Shigella infections are common and usually not serious — though, certainly, no one likes dealing with a bout of diarrhea. Drinking plenty of fluids can reduce your risk of complications. See a healthcare provider right away if you have signs of dehydration or if your symptoms last longer than a week.
