Splenic Infarction
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/splenic-infarction

Overview
--------
What is a splenic infarction?

A splenic infarction (pronounced “SPLEE-nik in-FAHRK-shun”), or splenic infarct, is when something affects the flow of blood to your spleen. Your spleen is located to the left of your stomach. It stores and filters blood that flows from your heart and helps protect your body from infection. When blood from your heart can’t get to your spleen, tissue in your spleen dies and creates an infarct. This is an area of dead tissue in your spleen.

Splenic infarctions are rare. When they happen, they may be a sign of a serious illness like blood cancer, heart disease or issues with your pancreas. That can be upsetting news. But the diagnosis may be your first step toward treatment.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of a splenic infarction?

The most significant symptom is sudden severe pain in the upper left side of your belly. The pain may spread to your left shoulder. Other symptoms may include:

Fever
Nausea
What causes a splenic infarction?

Many diseases and conditions may cause a splenic infarction. Common causes include:

Blood cancer. Leukemia, lymphoma, myelofibrosis and polycythemia vera are examples of blood cancer that may lead to an infarct.
Blood disorders. Diseases like protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency and sickle cell anemia make your blood more likely to cause blood clots that block blood flow to your spleen.
Heart disease. Conditions like atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure and infective endocarditis may cause blood clots.
Infectious diseases. Splenic infarction may be a complication of diseases like babesiosis, COVID-19, malaria and mononucleosis.
Pancreatic disorders. Pancreatitis and tumors in your pancreas may affect blood flow to your spleen.
Trauma. Injuries to your spleen from a fall or a motor vehicle accident cause the condition.
What are the complications of a splenic infarction?

The most common complications are:

Ruptured spleen
An abscess in your spleen
A pseudocyst (a benign fluid-filled mass) in your spleen

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How do healthcare providers diagnose splenic infarctions?

A healthcare provider will do a physical examination. They’ll check for tenderness in your upper left belly and ask about other symptoms. They’ll also ask about your medical history. They may order certain blood tests, but splenic infarction diagnoses depend on computed tomography (CT) scans or ultrasound.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is a splenic infarction treated?

Your treatment will depend on why you have a splenic infarction. You may have one because you have an underlying condition like blood cancer. In that case, your healthcare provider may recommend treatments like chemotherapy or immunotherapy. Other general treatments for splenic infarction are:

Antibiotics for infection
IV fluids to prevent dehydration
Pain medication
Prescription medication for nausea

A healthcare provider may do a splenectomy — surgery to remove your spleen — if you have a complication like a ruptured spleen or abscess.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have splenic infarction?

Your prognosis, or what you can expect after diagnosis and treatment, depends on the reason why you have a splenic infarction. For example, if an infection causes the condition, antibiotics and pain medication may make your symptoms go away. Your situation will be different if you have an underlying condition like blood cancer. In that case, your healthcare provider is your best source for information on what you can expect.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
When should I see my healthcare provider?

If tests show you have a splenic infarction, you should contact your provider if symptoms come back after treatment or get worse. A splenic infarction may make your spleen rupture. A ruptured spleen is a medical emergency. You should go to the emergency room right away if you develop symptoms like:

Worsening pain in your upper left belly
Dizziness, lightheaded or nausea — these may be symptoms that you’re losing blood

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Your first symptom was probably sudden pain on the upper left side of your belly. Next came nausea and a fever. Tests show you have a splenic infarction, a rare condition that happens when some spleen tissue dies.

The symptoms may be your first clue something’s going on with your health. That something may be an infection. But a splenic infarction can also be a complication of serious illnesses like blood cancer or heart disease. The underlying cause may be a shock or one more health challenge for you to manage. Either way, your healthcare providers will have treatments to ease symptoms like pain and nausea. They’ll also recommend treatments for the underlying cause.
