Ebola Virus Disease
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/15606-ebola-virus-disease

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What happens if you have Ebola?

Each type of Ebola causes similar symptoms. The symptoms may come in phases. You may have flu-like symptoms at first, including:

Chills
Feeling very tired (fatigue) and weak
Fever
Loss of appetite
Muscle pain
Severe headache
Sore throat

Severe Ebola symptoms can develop a few days later, including:

Black, tarry stool (melena)
Bleeding or bruising
Confusion
Diarrhea that may be bloody
Rash or spots of blood under your skin (petechiae or purpura)
Red or bloodshot eyes
Vomiting that may be bloody or look like coffee grounds (coffee ground emesis)

Later Ebola stages can be severe. They may include:

Brain inflammation (encephalitis)
Organ failure
Seizures
Your body doesn’t get enough blood flow (shock)
How long does it take Ebola symptoms to show up?

Ebola symptoms may appear as early as two days after exposure to as late as three weeks.

Ebola outbreak causes

Ebola outbreaks develop in countries of West, Central and East Africa. Ebola viruses start in:

Antelope
Fruit bats
Nonhuman primates (apes and monkeys)

Each type of Ebola spreads in the same way.

How does Ebola spread?

Orthoebolaviruses spread through contact with body fluids of infected animals (spillover event) or humans. Body fluids include:

Amniotic fluid
Breast milk
Pee (urine)
Poop (stool)
Semen
Spit (saliva)
Sweat

You can get Ebola from surfaces, objects or medical devices that come into contact with the virus. You may even get it from eating the meat of infected animals.

Can you get Ebola from sex?

Yes, Ebola can transfer through sexual intercourse that involves the semen of an infected person. It’s possible to get Ebola from:

Anal sexual intercourse
Oral sexual intercourse
Vaginal sexual intercourse

There’s no evidence that Ebola can transfer through the vaginal fluids of an infected person.

Is Ebola airborne?

It’s very unlikely that Ebola is an airborne infection. Airborne infections spread through small respiratory droplets that hang in the air after:

Coughing
Heavy breathing
Laughing
Sneezing
Who is most at risk for Ebola?

You’re most at risk for Ebola if you’re in close contact with an infected person. This includes healthcare workers and family members.

If you’re in close contact with someone who has Ebola, it’s important to use proper personal protective equipment (PPE), like eye protection, face shields and masks.

Complications of Ebola

Even after you recover from Ebola, you may have long-term (chronic) complications. These may include:

Abdominal pain
Eye pain or redness
Fatigue
Headache
Muscle and joint pain
Numbness and tingling (peripheral neuropathy)
Peeling skin
Vision problems, including blindness, blurred vision and light sensitivity (photophobia)

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose Ebola

Ebola can be difficult to diagnose because it shares symptoms with other illnesses, including yellow fever, malaria and typhoid fever. Healthcare providers will first:

Review your health history
Ask about your symptoms
Ask about any recent travel or contact with people or animals that may have had Ebola

If they suspect you have Ebola, they’ll recommend a PCR test to diagnose Ebola. PCR tests are a type of blood test.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Can you get rid of Ebola?

Yes, there are Ebola treatments. Healthcare providers use two monoclonal antibody treatments for Ebola virus disease. Monoclonal antibodies work like your immune system’s natural antibodies. They help fight off the infection while your body builds its own defenses. The monoclonal antibody treatments include:

Ebanga®. This is a single monoclonal antibody.
Inmazeb®. This is a combination of three monoclonal antibodies.

Experts have only tested these treatments in Zaire ebolavirus infections.

Providers will also work to manage your symptoms and treat any potential complications. They may give you:

IV fluids to prevent dehydration
Oxygen therapy
Pain relievers
Vasopressors to raise low blood pressure
When should I see my healthcare provider?

If you’re at risk of Ebola exposure and you develop symptoms, see a healthcare provider right away. You may be at risk if you live in an area with animals that carry it, or you’ve traveled to an area with an outbreak.

You may wish to ask a provider the following questions during your appointment:

What symptoms should I look out for?
How can I avoid spreading Ebola to others?
What treatment do you recommend?
How long will I be contagious?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have Ebola?

It’s important to get a proper diagnosis and treatment as soon as you can to increase your chances of a full recovery.

If you’re sick with Ebola, it’s best to avoid being around other people (isolate) until you’re no longer capable of spreading the virus. Healthcare providers and others caring for you must use proper PPE to keep themselves and others safe.

After a full recovery, your immune system develops antibodies that will keep you immune from Ebola for about 10 years.

How long does Ebola stay in my body?

Ebola can stay in certain parts of your body for weeks or months, even after your symptoms go away. These include your:

Central nervous system (including the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds your brain and spinal cord)
Eyes
Semen
How long can Ebola live in semen?

Ebola can live in semen for a long time — between two and three months after you recover. Providers will conduct tests so you can know when you’re no longer contagious. But until then, use condoms during sexual intercourse to protect your partners from infection, or abstain from sex entirely.

Can you recover from Ebola?

Yes, you can recover from Ebola. But the different types have different survival rates:

Without treatment, up to 9 out of 10 people who have the Ebola virus can die
The Sudan virus is deadly in about half of all cases
The Bundibugyo virus is deadly in about 3 out of 10 cases
Taï Forest virus has caused Ebola in one person, and it wasn’t fatal

The average survival rate from all Ebola outbreaks is over 50%.

If you have Ebola, it’s important to get treatment as soon as possible.

Prevention
----------
Can Ebola be prevented?

The Ervebo® vaccine helps protect people who are at high risk of contracting Ebola virus. This includes people who work with orthoebolaviruses in a lab and healthcare workers who treat people who have Ebola. It can also act as a type of pre-exposure prophylaxis for people traveling to areas with Ebola outbreaks. It’s effective during outbreaks, too.

The Zabdeno®/Mvabea® vaccines also help protect adults and children 1 and up against Ebola virus. Zabdeno is the first vaccine dose, and Mvabea is a booster dose that you receive about two months later.

Public health organizations work to contain Ebola outbreaks by looking out for new cases and keeping providers safe who care for people who have Ebola. You can help protect yourself from getting Ebola by:

Avoiding contact with body fluids and tissues of people and animals (dead or alive) who may have Ebola
Avoiding sexual intercourse entirely or using condoms until tests confirm you no longer have Ebola in your semen
Isolating from others if you have Ebola
Not eating wild animal meat
Not touching the body fluids of anyone with Ebola and washing your hands after contact, even if you wear gloves
Not traveling to areas where there’s an Ebola outbreak
Using PPE when caring for someone with Ebola

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is Ebola still around?

Yes, Ebola still exists between outbreaks. It lives in infected animals. But it sometimes spreads to humans.

Has Ebola ever been in the U.S.?

Yes. During the 2013-2016 outbreak that started in Guinea, experts reported Ebola cases in the U.S. and some European countries. Most cases affected medical aid workers whose symptoms started after returning to the U.S. from West Africa. Or they flew to the U.S. for medical treatment after contracting Ebola.

No Ebola strains that can affect people have ever started in the U.S.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Ebola outbreaks can generate a lot of scary headlines. It’s a life-threatening virus that can cause lasting health effects. But more and more people are surviving Ebola with advances in vaccines to prevent its transmission and better treatments. If you’re at risk of encountering Ebola, there are steps you can take to protect yourself and prevent the spread. If you think you’ve been exposed, it’s important to keep an eye on your health. Get medical attention right away if you notice symptoms.
