Endocarditis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/16957-endocarditis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of endocarditis

Symptoms of infective endocarditis can include:

Chest pain
Heart murmur
Fast heart rate (tachycardia)
Fatigue
Fever above 100°F (38.4°C)
Chills and night sweats
Loss of appetite and weight loss
Muscle and joint aches
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Skin rash
Swelling in your abdomen or legs
Blood in your pee (hematuria)

Go to the emergency room if you have these symptoms. Infective endocarditis is life-threatening.

Infective endocarditis can be:

Acute. It begins suddenly with a high fever and fast heart rate. It can become life-threatening within days.
Subacute. It develops gradually over weeks or several months.

Non-infective endocarditis typically doesn’t have symptoms. But you’ll likely have symptoms of the underlying condition causing it (like lupus). Most people with non-infective endocarditis don’t know they have it until they get heart imaging tests for other reasons. It may also be a finding in an autopsy.

Endocarditis causes

Most of the time, a bacterial infection causes endocarditis. The bacteria come from elsewhere in your body — like your mouth, skin or respiratory system — and travel through your blood to your heart.

Healthy heart tissue is normally very resistant to infection. But underlying damage can make it more likely for endocarditis to develop. The bacteria attach to and grow on damaged tissue. They grow vegetation and produce enzymes. This destroys surrounding heart tissue.

Risk factors

In general, endocarditis isn’t very common. But certain factors increase your risk for it, like:

Artificial heart valve, pacemaker or defibrillator
Diabetes
Heart conditions, especially heart valve disease and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
IV substance use
Poor dental health and gum disease
Previous bacterial endocarditis
Previous heart valve surgery
Weakened immune system
Complications of this condition

Without early diagnosis and treatment, endocarditis can lead to complications like:

Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia)
Abscesses around heart valves
Heart block
Heart failure
Leaky heart valve
Sepsis
Stroke
Death

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

If you have symptoms and risk factors for endocarditis, your healthcare provider will want to make a diagnosis as soon as possible.

Diagnostic tests for endocarditis include blood tests, like:

Bacterial culture tests
Complete blood count
C-reactive protein test

Imaging tests can show vegetations and heart damage. Your provider may recommend one or more of these tests:

Echocardiogram
Transesophageal echocardiogram
Heart MRI

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What is the treatment for endocarditis?

Endocarditis can be life-limiting. You’ll need quick treatment to prevent damage to your heart valves and more serious complications.

You’ll likely need IV antibiotics for several weeks — usually up to six — to fully treat the infection. Your provider may adjust the antibiotics once they know which bacteria are at play.

Your provider will check your symptoms throughout your therapy to see if it’s effective. They’ll also repeat your blood cultures.

If endocarditis damages your heart valve and any other part of your heart, you may need surgery.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have endocarditis?

You can expect to take antibiotics for two to eight weeks to get rid of the infection. Most people survive endocarditis when they get aggressive treatment. But the risk of serious complications or death depends on:

Your age
Whether you have an artificial valve
How long you’ve had the infection
What type of organism (bacteria) made you sick
How badly your heart valve is damaged

Your healthcare provider can give you a better idea of what to expect based on your situation.

Prevention
----------
Can this be prevented?

Endocarditis isn’t always preventable. But if you’re at high risk for it or have had it before, your healthcare provider will likely recommend taking prophylactic (preventive) antibiotics before certain dental procedures. These include procedures that involve:

Your gums
The periapical (root) area of your teeth
Your oral mucosa (tissue that lines the inside of your mouth)

Tell your medical and dental providers you have heart disease that places you at a greater risk for endocarditis. Carry a wallet identification card with you that has specific antibiotic guidelines. The American Heart Association offers these.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
With aggressive treatment, most people recover from endocarditis. Know the symptoms of endocarditis and go to the ER right away if you think you have it. Taking good care of your teeth and mouth can lower your risk of endocarditis. That includes daily care, as well as visiting your dental provider regularly.
