Cribriform Hymen
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22258-cribriform-hymen

Overview
--------
What is a cribriform hymen?

A cribriform hymen means your hymen has many small holes (perforations). It’s something you’re born with.

Your hymen is a thin, fleshy membrane that surrounds the opening of your vagina. Usually, the hymen has one moderate-sized hole. A cribriform hymen can cause issues with periods (menstruation) and penetrative sex.

Learning your genital anatomy is different from what’s expected can stir up a lot of emotions and concern. Know that a cribriform hymen is just that — a difference. It may go away on its own, or a simple surgery can treat it.

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of a cribriform hymen?

With a cribriform hymen, discharge can flow out of your vagina, like blood from periods (menstruation). But blood may come out slower than usual. This means your periods may last longer than normal — perhaps by four to seven days.

Another symptom of a cribriform hymen is having difficulty comfortably inserting an object into your vagina. For example, you may:

Not be able to insert a tampon or remove it
Feel pain when inserting or removing a tampon
Bleed or feel pain during sexual intercourse

Some people with a cribriform hymen may also experience:

Abdominal pain
Lower back pain
Menstrual pain

A cribriform hymen may not cause any symptoms at all. But if you experience any pain or abnormal bleeding near your vagina, talk to your healthcare provider.

What causes a cribriform hymen?

A cribriform hymen happens when the hymen forms differently during fetal development. But scientists don’t yet know what causes the difference. There’s nothing you can do to prevent it.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is a cribriform hymen diagnosed?

A healthcare provider may detect a cribriform hymen at birth during a physical examination of a newborn. But many people don’t know they have one until puberty or later.

A healthcare provider (usually a gynecologist) can make the diagnosis by looking closely at your hymen during a pelvic exam.

Your first pelvic exam may bring some anxiety simply because you don’t know what to expect. Make sure your healthcare provider is someone you trust and feel comfortable with. If you feel uncomfortable at any point, say so. You have control over your body.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Can a cribriform hymen be fixed?

Not all cribriform hymens require treatment. But you may choose to have surgery to open or remove your hymen if it interferes with:

Pelvic exams and tests that help you monitor your health, like Pap tests
Period blood flow
Tampon use
Vaginal sex

The surgery is called a hymenotomy. Your healthcare provider cuts away the extra tissue, leaving only one opening that’s a typical size. It’s a minor outpatient procedure, which means you can go home the same day.

Your provider will talk to you about options for anesthesia to manage pain during the procedure. You may need stitches afterward, which usually dissolve on their own.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have a cribriform hymen?

A cribriform hymen may cause pain and limit activities, but it’s not a dangerous condition.

Sometimes, it goes away on its own as a child grows. Your hymen may tear or wear down from everyday activities, like riding a bike or gymnastics. This may naturally open it up.

Can a cribriform hymen come back after treatment?

If you choose to have a hymenectomy to treat a cribriform hymen, the extra tissue won’t grow back.

What questions should I ask my healthcare provider?

If you want to know more about your hymen, consider asking a healthcare provider the following questions:

What type of hymen do I have?
Is my hymen healthy?
Is it safe to use tampons and have intercourse?
Would you recommend surgery?

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
There’s nothing you can do to control the shape of your hymen. And everyone’s hymen is different. If you have a cribriform hymen, it may not cause any symptoms. But if you’re having issues with tampon use or penetrative sex, it’s a good idea to see your healthcare provider. Talking about your genital anatomy or sex life can be difficult. But it’s nothing to be ashamed of. It’s an important part of your health. And your provider is there to help you, not judge you.
