Tetralogy of Fallot
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/22343-tetralogy-of-fallot

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

Your healthcare provider can diagnose tetralogy of Fallot during pregnancy or after your baby is born. They usually find ToF in the first few weeks or months of life. During prenatal tests, your healthcare provider may use a fetal echocardiogram to look at the fetal heart’s structure if the initial ultrasound looks suspicious.

Tests used to diagnose ToF after birth

During a physical exam, a healthcare provider will listen to your child’s heart. If they have ToF, their provider will most likely hear a heart murmur.

Tests a provider may use to diagnose tetralogy of Fallot may include:

Pulse oximetry
Echocardiogram
Chest X-ray or cardiac CT (computed tomography)
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Cardiac catheterization

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is tetralogy of Fallot diagnosed?

Your healthcare provider can diagnose tetralogy of Fallot during pregnancy or after your baby is born. They usually find it in the first few weeks or months of life.

Tests before birth

During prenatal tests, your healthcare provider may see something in an ultrasound image that looks like it could be tetralogy of Fallot. From 18 to 22 weeks into your pregnancy, your provider will be able to use a fetal echocardiogram or ultrasound image of the fetus’s heart to see if the heart’s structure is normal.

Tests in infancy

If your baby has tetralogy of Fallot, your provider will most likely hear a heart murmur when listening to your baby’s heart. They can easily check your newborn baby’s oxygen level with pulse oximetry (pulse ox). If it shows a low oxygen level, your provider can do an echocardiogram (ultrasound of the heart). These tests are painless and don’t go through the surface of your baby’s skin.

Pulse oximetry. Before you take your baby home, your provider will put sensors on your newborn’s feet or hands to find out how much oxygen is in their blood.
Echocardiogram. This uses sound waves to show your baby’s heart structure and how well their heart is working.
Chest X-ray or CT (computed tomography). This may show a heart that has the abnormal shape of a boot.
Tests in childhood or adulthood

To diagnose tetralogy of Fallot in a child or adult, a provider may use the above methods, as well as an electrocardiogram (EKG) and cardiac catheterization.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is ToF treated?

Tetralogy of Fallot treatment includes medicine to ease symptoms and surgery to fix the issues. As a first step in tetralogy of Fallot treatment, your child’s provider can give them beta-blockers (to improve blood flow) and extra oxygen. Three to six months after birth, your baby can have surgery to make blood move through their heart the way it should.

Tetralogy of Fallot repair

Repair options vary depending on your child’s condition. If your baby is too small or weak for a full repair, their provider can do a simpler procedure until they can do the complete ToF repair. These techniques can relieve symptoms for a number of years — well into adulthood — until a provider can do a more complete repair surgery.

Tetralogy of Fallot repair procedures include:

Complete repair. A surgeon can make the pulmonary valve and the path to the pulmonary artery bigger. And they can patch the hole between the two ventricles.
BTT shunt procedure. Your provider can put a shunt or tube between your child’s subclavian and pulmonary arteries to help blood get to the lungs.
Catheter procedure. A provider can put in a stent for better blood flow out of the right ventricle. They can also put a stent in the patent ductus arteriosus to keep it from closing.
Surgery for adults

Occasionally, a person reaches adulthood without having had any surgical repair. This isn’t common. Specialists recommend they have a complete surgical repair to prevent future complications or sudden death.

To perform a complete repair, a surgeon who specializes in adult congenital heart disease closes the ventricular septal defect with a patch. They open the passageway out of the right ventricle and repair or replace the pulmonary valve. They enlarge the pulmonary arteries to both lungs. Sometimes, they place a tube between the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery to improve blood flow.

Many adults who undergo repair for a ToF heart defect don’t need further surgical treatment. But they should continue to follow up with an adult congenital heart disease specialist for regular monitoring.

Complications of ToF surgery

Complications of tetralogy of Fallot surgery (some of which may show up later) may include:

Electrical disturbances. Having a patch on the VSD can block your atria from sending electrical signals to your ventricles. A pacemaker can correct this. With repaired ToF, you’re at risk for arrhythmias in your heart’s top and bottom chambers. You should get an evaluation for a syncopal episode.
Residual ventricular septal defect. Sometimes, the ventricular septal defect doesn’t seal completely and there’s some leaking around the patch.
Aneurysm. Patches that repair a ventricle can cause weak sections of the ventricle to bulge out, forming an aneurysm. There’s also an increased risk of aneurysms of the ascending aorta.
Shunt issues. The shunts providers use for an initial repair can cause issues like narrowing (stenosis), high blood pressure in your pulmonary artery or excess volume load on the left side of your heart.
Leaky valves. Your pulmonary, aortic or tricuspid heart valves can leak. Sometimes, a provider will need to replace the pulmonary valve.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Surgery for tetralogy of Fallot creates a normal blood flow path. But you or your child can still have other issues, including:

Heart infection risk. You can have a higher risk of an infection in your heart (endocarditis), so dental care is important. Antibiotics can help prevent infection during dental visits.
Slow development. Babies with tetralogy of Fallot may be slower to develop and grow. They may need physical, speech or occupational therapy to help them.
Pregnancy risks. Your provider may need to check your heart before you get pregnant, and there’s a higher risk of miscarriage.
Medication restrictions. You may only be able to use certain kinds of medicines and birth control with your heart issue as an adult.
Outlook for ToF

With medical advances, the outlook for babies with tetralogy of Fallot is better than it was in the past. Surgical treatment is very effective in correcting structural defects and blood flow through the heart. With an experienced congenital heart disease surgeon, surgical repair of the defect in adults has a very high success rate.

Most babies who have surgery today to fix tetralogy of Fallot will have active lives. But people with repaired ToF typically have some restrictions on certain strenuous activities, like competitive sports. Long-term survival after ToF repair is very good. Most people who undergo repair are alive 30 years later. Without a repair, 1 out of 3 people with tetralogy of Fallot live to age 10.

Some adults who had tetralogy of Fallot surgery as infants may develop issues that require medicines, medical care or surgery in adulthood. Adults should consult with their cardiologist before having surgery on a different part of their body.

Is there anything I can do to help my child feel better?

Until your baby has surgery, you can help them through tet spells. When your baby has trouble breathing, put them into a squatting position. (Push their knees to their chest.) Squatting helps move more blood to their lungs.

It’s also helpful to make sure your child is drinking enough fluids and isn’t exerting themselves too much.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If your baby is having a severe tet spell, take them to the closest emergency room. If you’ve passed out, are dizzy, are short of breath or have chest pain, you should also go to the emergency room.

Adults who’ve had initial surgery for ToF as a child should have thorough cardiac evaluations every year or two. You may need various tests to check cardiac function, like:

Holter monitor
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Exercise stress test
Echocardiogram
Heart MRI

Also, your provider will need to monitor the size and function of the right side of your heart.

After tetralogy of Fallot repair, your child will need regular visits with a provider who specializes in children’s hearts (pediatric cardiologist). Regular care will continue into adulthood.

Questions to ask your provider include:

Will my child need to limit their sports activities after surgery?
Will my child need additional surgeries?
What medicines, if any, will my child need to take?

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Learning that your newborn child has a heart problem can feel like a heavy weight to bear. But your healthcare team has helped other parents in this situation and they can help you, too. Don’t be afraid to talk to a therapist if you feel stressed about caring for a child with tetralogy of Fallot. A counselor can also help kids and teens who may feel like their classmates are ahead of them in development.
