Tick Bites
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/7234-tick-bites

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of tick-borne illnesses

Symptoms of conditions caused by tick bites could include:

Fever
Chills
Muscle pain
Headaches
Tiredness
Itchiness or irritation
Nausea and vomiting
Swollen lymph nodes
Allergic reaction to eating red meat
Skin rash

The rash might look like a circle or a bullseye. Or it might be small, red or purplish spots that are actually spots of blood under your skin (petechiae).

What does a tick bite look like?

Tick bites themselves often don’t cause noticeable symptoms like mosquito bites do. Sometimes, they might cause a bump, swelling or itching. You most often know you were bitten by a tick because you catch them attached to you.

Where on your body do ticks bite?

Ticks can climb onto any part of your body. But they often move to warm, moist areas to latch on. Common places on your body to find ticks include:

On your scalp and neck
In your groin
Behind your knees
In your belly button
In or around your ears
In your armpits
Around your waist
Why do ticks bite?

Ticks bite because blood is their source of food. Young ticks (nymphs) hatch in spring and find an animal or person to feed off of. They mature into adults and take another meal in the fall. Tick bites are most common in spring, early summer and fall, but you can get bitten anytime.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose tick bites

Healthcare providers don’t usually diagnose tick bites directly. You might not have any markings on your skin or remember being bitten. But if you begin to have symptoms of a tick-borne illness, your provider may be able to use blood tests to check for diseases. Tests can sometimes take a few weeks. So, your provider may start treating you before the results come back.

If you found a tick biting you, be sure to take a photo or write down notes about what the tick looked like (any markings it had or if it was flat or rounded). This can help your provider treat you if you get sick. If you have symptoms of a tick-borne illness, make sure to tell your provider if you’ve been in an area that could have ticks, even if you don’t remember being bitten.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What should you do about a tick bite?

If you notice a tick biting you, you can remove it with these steps:

Gently clean the area around the tick with a cotton ball soaked in rubbing alcohol or warm, soapy water.
Use rounded-end tweezers to gently but firmly pinch the tick near its head, as close to your skin as possible. Don’t crush the tick’s body (this can push more germs into your body) or touch it with your hands.
Take note (or a good photo) of what the tick looks like. Is it flat or rounded (engorged)? Does it have markings on its back? Save it in a container if you can. This can help your provider know how long the tick was biting you and how likely it is that it transmitted diseases.
Wash the bite area thoroughly with soap and water.
If you’re unsure how long the tick was attached or if you develop symptoms, contact your provider.

Don’t use kerosene, petroleum jelly (like Vaseline®) or a lit match to remove the tick.

Tick-borne disease treatment

Certain tick-borne illnesses are treated with antibiotics or antiparasitics. For others, there are no specific treatments.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
When should I worry about a tick bite?

See a healthcare provider if:

You think a tick was attached to you for several hours (or longer) or if it looks like it’s taken a meal (rounded)
You develop a rash
You develop flu-like symptoms (fevers, chills, aches, pains)
The bite is painful or blistering

Prevention
----------
Can tick bites be prevented?

You can reduce your risk of tick bites by:

Avoiding long grass and woods: Keep your grass cut shorter than 5 inches. Stay near the center of cleared paths while in wooded areas.
Using bug spray: Check to make sure it contains DEET, picaridin, IR3535 or other ingredients approved to keep ticks away. Sources like the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have guides that can help you find the repellent that’s right for you.
Covering your skin: Cover as much of your skin as possible with clothing when you’re in areas that might have ticks. This includes long pants, long sleeves and socks.
Checking yourself for ticks: Pay special attention to areas where ticks like to hide on your body. If possible, have someone else check you in places you can’t see yourself (like your back and scalp). Do this every morning and evening to limit the amount of time a tick might be attached to you.
Checking your pets, too: Pets can bring ticks into your house. Check your pets for ticks often, especially after they’ve been outside. You can also ask your veterinarian about the best way to protect your pets from ticks.
Preparing for travel: Before traveling, talk to your travel healthcare clinic or provider, or check with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Consider getting vaccinated against tick-borne encephalitis if you’re planning on traveling to an area where it spreads.

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
What are the different kinds of ticks?

Some of the most common ticks in the U.S. include:

Blacklegged tick (deer tick). Deer ticks are usually black with areas of reddish-brown or white on their backs, depending on whether they’re adults or nymphs.
Dog tick (wood tick). Dog ticks have whitish markings on their backs. Adults are slightly larger than deer ticks.
Lone Star tick. Adult female Lone Star ticks have a distinctive white dot on their backs. Males and nymphs are brown or reddish with black markings.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
There are lots of things to like about spring and summer: The weather, vacations, flowers blooming. Tick bites don’t make anyone’s list. Fortunately, there are simple habits that can prevent tick bites or catch them early. If you find a tick on yourself, don’t panic. Remove it carefully and contact your provider if you have any questions about whether you need treatment.
