Tortuous Colon (Redundant Colon)
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/tortuous-colon

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of a tortuous colon

Having a tortuous colon won’t necessarily cause any symptoms. But some people have symptoms like:

Abdominal pain or gas pain
A feeling of fullness or bloating
Constipation (hard, infrequent or difficult bowel movements)

This might be because poop is taking a longer time than usual to make its way through your colon.

Tortuous colon causes

Healthcare providers aren’t sure whether a tortuous colon is something you’re born with, something that happens over time or both. Slow-moving, hard stools pushing through your colon may play a part in stretching it out. Genetics may help determine how your colon forms and how it changes over time.

Complications of a tortuous colon

If you have problems moving stool through your colon, having a longer and twistier pathway won’t help. The longer your stool spends in your colon, the harder and drier it becomes. This is because part of your colon’s job is absorbing water from your stool. A redundant colon may absorb more water than needed.

A tortuous colon might also make it more difficult for your provider to complete a colonoscopy. They might not be able to get all the way through the twists and turns with the colonoscope. Your provider might recommend additional colon cancer screenings to look for colon polyps they might have missed.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose a redundant colon

Most people learn about their redundant colon after a colonoscopy. But other exams and procedures may also discover it. Healthcare providers don’t diagnose a redundant colon as a condition in itself. But they will make note of it if they find it. This is because it may relate to other conditions you might have.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Is there any treatment for a redundant colon?

You might not need any treatment. But if you have symptoms related to slow or infrequent bowel movements, your healthcare provider will treat those symptoms. Treatment usually starts with changes to your eating plan and lifestyle. Your provider might suggest taking fiber supplements, probiotics or laxatives.

If your issues don’t improve with these changes, your provider might need to test you for other causes of constipation. You may have another condition besides your redundant colon. Your treatment plan will depend on your diagnosis. Surgery is rarely necessary, unless you have serious complications.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

See a healthcare provider if you have ongoing bowel problems that don’t respond to common remedies. Occasional constipation can happen to anyone. But if it’s ongoing, it can become increasingly serious. Pooping problems don’t just affect your quality of life — they can snowball into bigger issues.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have a tortuous colon?

If your colon is normally healthy, you probably don’t need to worry about how long it is. But if you’re prone to constipation, your tortuous colon may be related — as a cause or as an effect, or both. You may need to take extra steps to protect your bowel health and prevent constipation from worsening.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
You might be unsettled to learn that part of your anatomy is different from the typical. You might think, “But I don’t feel like anything’s wrong!” If you don’t, then it probably isn’t. On the other hand, if you’re thinking, “I knew there was something going on!” Then your redundant colon might mean something. 

This discovery is just one landmark along your journey to the right diagnosis and treatment. It doesn’t explain everything. But it might be the validation you need to go on searching for answers. Your healthcare provider will put it in your records so that other providers will know it might be a factor.
