Tubulointerstitial Nephritis
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/tubulointerstitial-nephritis

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the signs of tubulointerstitial nephritis?

The signs and symptoms of tubulointerstitial nephritis depend on the type you have. Some people might not have any symptoms, or the symptoms may take a long time to appear. For others, symptoms develop quickly.

Acute TIN symptoms may include:

Peeing a lot more or a lot less than expected
Waking up more than once to pee (nocturia)
Pain while peeing (dysuria)
Fever
Lower back pain
Flank pain

Chronic TIN symptoms typically include kidney failure symptoms, including:

Feeling really tired (fatigue)
Itchiness
Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite
Trouble breathing
Peeing more than usual
Tubulointerstitial nephritis causes

Acute TIN causes include:

Allergic reaction to certain medications: These may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), penicillin, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), sulfa drugs (medications that help treat infections), antineoplastic agents (medications that help treat cancer), diuretics and vaccines. Medications are the most common cause of TIN.
Conditions that affect your immune system: These may include lupus and Sjögren’s syndrome.
Bacterial infections: Examples include coli, Proteus mirabilis and Staphylococcus. These bacteria cause urinary tract infections (UTIs) that start in the urinary bladder and move up into the kidneys.
Viral infections: Examples include COVID-19, hepatitis B, HIV and cytomegalovirus.
Fungal infections: Histoplasmosis can cause acute TIN.
Parasitic infections: Examples include Toxoplasma and Leishmania.

A kidney transplant rejection can also cause TIN.

Some chronic TIN causes include:

Certain medications, including analgesics and lithium
Heavy metal exposure, including lead and mercury
Conditions that affect your metabolism, including hypercalcemia and hyperoxaluria
Genetic disorders
What is the most common drug to cause acute tubulointerstitial nephritis?

Some of the most common drugs that cause acute TIN include:

Antibiotics
NSAIDs
Proton pump inhibitors
Risk factors

Anyone can get tubulointerstitial nephritis. But you’re more likely to get TIN if you have a:

Hypersensitive reaction to a medication
Condition that affects your immune system
Bad bacterial, viral, fungal or parasitic infection
Job that exposes you to heavy metals
Genetic condition that affects your kidneys
Long history of taking NSAIDs
Complications of tubulointerstitial nephritis

Tubulointerstitial nephritis may continue to get worse. This can eventually lead to kidney failure (end-stage renal disease). Kidney failure treatment includes dialysis or a kidney transplant.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose tubulointerstitial nephritis

Healthcare providers can use kidney function tests to look for signs of kidney damage. These are blood tests and urine tests (urinalysis) that determine how well your kidneys function.

In many cases, the presence of kidney damage symptoms is enough for healthcare providers to determine that something is affecting your kidneys and you need treatment. But the only way to know for sure that tubulointerstitial nephritis is causing kidney damage is to get a kidney biopsy. During a kidney biopsy, a provider removes a small sample of your kidney tissue and examines it under a microscope.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What is the best treatment for tubulointerstitial nephritis?

Tubulointerstitial nephritis treatment includes avoiding or treating the cause. A healthcare provider may prescribe corticosteroids to help manage inflammation if your symptoms don’t improve within a week.

Providers may also recommend ways to preserve your kidney function. They may advise you to:

See specialists, including a nephrologist
Manage your blood pressure
Manage your blood glucose (sugar) if you have diabetes
Follow kidney-friendly eating patterns
Quit smoking
Maintain a weight that’s healthy for you
Is tubulointerstitial nephritis reversible?

If you have tubulointerstitial nephritis, you can restore kidney function if you get a prompt diagnosis and treatment. Without treatment, TIN may cause permanent kidney damage.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Getting a tubulointerstitial nephritis diagnosis as soon as possible helps prevent permanent kidney damage that can lead to kidney failure. Contact a healthcare provider if you:

Have any changes to your peeing habits
Feel more tired than usual
Don’t feel like eating
Have pain in your lower back or sides
Have trouble breathing

Make sure to schedule regular appointments with a kidney specialist if you receive a TIN diagnosis. They can monitor your kidney health.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have tubulointerstitial nephritis?

Your outlook depends on many things, including:

What’s causing tubulointerstitial nephritis
How quickly you get treatment
How well your kidneys worked before you got TIN

Many people have improved kidney function once they stop taking the medication that causes TIN or a healthcare provider treats the underlying cause. Though even with treatment, chronic TIN can eventually cause kidney failure.

Prevention
----------
Can tubulointerstitial nephritis be prevented?

Scheduling annual appointments with a healthcare provider throughout your life is a good way to help monitor your kidney health and prevent tubulointerstitial nephritis, especially if you’re at a greater risk of getting TIN.

You can also take care of your kidneys by:

Eating healthy foods every day
Maintaining a healthy weight for you
Being active for at least 30 minutes for at least five days a week
Avoiding smoking, vaping and using tobacco products in general
Taking medications only as directed

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
Is tubulointerstitial nephritis the same as pyelonephritis?

No. Pyelonephritis is another name for a kidney infection. But pyelonephritis can cause tubulointerstitial nephritis.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Hearing you have a kidney disease can be a shock. It can feel like you don’t even have time to process your diagnosis before you must review your health history, schedule more tests or make appointments with specialists. It’s important to get treatment as soon as possible. But it’s OK to pause so you can reflect on your feelings and learn about tubulointerstitial nephritis.

Some cases of TIN are mild — you can make a full recovery without any permanent damage to your kidneys just by avoiding or treating the underlying cause. Others are more serious, and you may need to manage the kidney damage for the rest of your life. But it’s possible to manage TIN effectively while maintaining a fulfilling life and enjoying quality time with friends and family.

Talk to a healthcare provider if you have any questions or notice any changes in your symptoms.
