Type 5 Diabetes
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/type-5-diabetes

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of Type 5 diabetes

Type 5 diabetes symptoms can include:

Increased thirst
Frequent urination (peeing)
Headache
Blurred vision
Fatigue
Slow-healing cuts and sores

Many classic symptoms of diabetes overlap with undernutrition signs, like weight loss, fatigue and hunger. Because of this, Type 5 may be difficult to recognize.

People with Type 5 diabetes typically have underweight — a body mass index (BMI) that’s less than 18.5. They may also have features of long-term (chronic) undernutrition, like:

Impaired skeletal growth
Enlarged parotid (salivary) gland
Skin and/or head hair changes
Type 5 diabetes causes

Research is ongoing. But scientists think Type 5 diabetes happens when chronic undernutrition prevents your pancreas from fully developing.

A lack of nutrients over a long time can affect many parts of your body and health. This can include your pancreas. It’s the organ that makes insulin, a hormone that’s necessary to manage blood sugar levels.

People with this type have a history of malnutrition in early childhood or during fetal development. Researchers think this affects the growth of their pancreases.

Complications of this condition

Type 5 diabetes can lead to the same complications as other types of diabetes, like:

Cardiovascular disease
Kidney damage
Eye (retina) damage
Nerve damage

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

The main test to help diagnose diabetes is usually a blood glucose test. This test checks the level of glucose (sugar) in your blood. People with diabetes often have a result of over 200 mg/dL.

In the U.S. and other high-income countries, healthcare providers use other tests to help identify the type of diabetes (like Type 1 or Type 2). These may include an A1C, urinalysis and antibody tests.

Due to limited access to these kinds of tests in low- and middle-income countries, providers often misdiagnose Type 5 diabetes as Type 1 diabetes.

A history of malnutrition in childhood, a low BMI and age younger than 30 years at diagnosis can all help distinguish Type 5 diabetes from Type 1, which it can be easily confused with. A unique feature of Type 5 is that people with it often don’t have ketones in their pee at diagnosis. It’s very common for people with Type 1 to have ketones at diagnosis.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is Type 5 diabetes treated?

Healthcare providers typically prescribe insulin injections to manage Type 5 (malnutrition-related diabetes). Researchers are studying the possibility of using oral diabetes medications to manage it.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Researchers and healthcare providers still have a lot to learn about Type 5 diabetes. It’s gone unrecognized for a long time. With ongoing research and advocacy, experts aim to better understand and treat Type 5 diabetes.
