Bladder Outlet Obstruction
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/15181-bladder-outlet-obstruction

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction

Bladder outlet obstruction can cause symptoms of urinary tract obstruction. The name for these is lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS).

You may have a urinary blockage if you:

Have trouble starting your urine stream
Feel like you have a full bladder but can’t empty it completely
Pass pee frequently during sleeping hours
Have pain in your lower abdomen or side
Have a pee flow that starts and stops or is very slow
Use the bathroom often, but very little pee comes out
Feel pain when passing pee
Feel an urgent need to empty your bladder
What causes a bladder outlet obstruction?

An enlarged prostate gland (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH) is a common cause of bladder outlet obstruction.

But many different things can cause a bladder outlet obstruction, like:

Scar tissue in your urethra (urethral stricture)
Bladder stones (hardened minerals)
Procedures for stress incontinence
Noncancerous (harmless) lesions or cysts
Urethral, vaginal, uterine, bladder, rectal, prostate or cervical cancer
Bladder or uterus falling down into your vaginal area (pelvic organ prolapse)
Severe constipation or impaction of stool
Risk factors

Risk factors for bladder obstruction include:

Lower maximum flow rate of urine
Longer urine flow time
Less efficient bladder emptying
Older age
Complications of this condition

It’s important to treat a urinary tract blockage as soon as possible to prevent complications. Without prompt diagnosis and treatment, you may have complications like:

Urinary tract infections
Loss of some kidney function
Kidney damage
Kidney stones
Inability to empty your bladder completely

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

A healthcare provider will perform a physical exam to diagnose bladder outlet obstruction. They’ll also want to know about your medical history and what you’ve been experiencing. They’ll ask you questions like:

Do you feel pain in your abdomen, or pain when you pee?
When you go to pee, does it take a while to start?
Do you ever pee in your sleep?
When you’re done peeing, do you feel like your bladder is still full, or partially full?
When you pee, does your urine stream start and stop (out of your control)?

Tests to diagnose bladder outlet obstruction may include:

Blood tests to check for kidney damage
Urinalysis to check for blood or infection
Pelvic ultrasound of your kidneys and bladder to find where the pee blockage is occurring
Cystoscopy to look for narrowing of your urethra
Urodynamic testing to show how the muscles of your bladder and sphincters function
Electromyography (EMG) to check your muscle and nerve function
Post-void residual urine test to see how much pee you have in your bladder after you pee
CT urogram (a series of X-rays)
MRI (imaging that uses radio waves)
Voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG, a type of X-ray)

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is bladder outlet obstruction treated?

The type of treatment you get depends on what’s causing the urinary blockage. For example, a healthcare provider will use different treatments for bladder stones than for prostate cancer. For some people, medications like alpha-blockers or finasteride improve bladder outlet obstruction. For others, physical therapy or a pessary (device to support a woman’s pelvic organs) may help with bladder obstruction.

Procedures or surgeries for bladder outlet obstruction may include:

Foley catheter to drain pee from your bladder
Surgical procedures to remove the obstruction
Transurethral bladder neck incisions
Sacrocolpopexy for pelvic organ prolapse
Laser lithotripsy for stones
Urethroplasty for strictures

Many of these urological surgeries are minimally invasive. That means you can expect a shorter hospital stay and a quicker recovery. Recovery time varies by procedure.

While waiting for treatment to fix bladder outlet obstruction, you may be able to unblock urine flow at home. You can learn to use a catheter to empty your bladder (self-catheterization). If you have a penis, you may get a better urine (pee) flow by sitting down to pee. Or you may be able to pass more pee by leaning forward for 30 seconds before trying to pee again.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

Go to the emergency department if the pain from a urinary tract blockage is unbearable. This could be a sign of complications. You should also seek immediate help if you can’t pass pee or have a urinary tract infection.

If you’ve had surgery, you’ll need follow-up appointments with your provider. After you’ve recovered, contact your provider if you have problems peeing again.

You may want to ask your healthcare provider:

What’s the cause of bladder outlet obstruction in my case?
Could it happen again?
What’s the best treatment option for me?

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if I have this condition?

Unless the pain is unbearable, bladder outlet obstruction shouldn’t keep you from your normal daily activities.

It’s comforting to know that healthcare providers can treat most cases of bladder outlet obstruction. Your BOO-related symptoms should go away with treatment. But bladder outlet obstruction can come back. In some cases, you may need surgery.

The cause of a bladder outlet obstruction affects your prognosis (outlook). It’s different for each case.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
It’s frustrating to have a hard time emptying your bladder. But you don’t have to accept it. Treatments can help many people with this condition. If you have symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction, don’t hesitate to see your healthcare provider. Prompt treatment can help you avoid kidney and bladder complications.
