Blunt Force Trauma
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/blunt-force-trauma

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What are the symptoms of blunt force trauma?

Some symptoms of blunt force trauma are the same no matter which part of your body the injury affects. These include:

Pain
Bruising or redness
Swelling
Bleeding (when the force is enough to tear or split skin)

But some symptoms are very specific to the affected body part. Examples include:

Head trauma: Confusion, feeling dizzy or lightheaded, or coma
Chest trauma: Trouble breathing, heart rhythm irregularities, or blue fingernails or lips (cyanosis)
Abdominal trauma: Nausea and vomiting or rebound pain (this happens when you press on your abdomen and the pain starts when you stop pressing)
What causes blunt force trauma?

Motor vehicle crashes are the top cause of blunt force trauma worldwide. Other common causes of blunt force trauma include:

Falls
Sports injuries
Violent incidents (abuse, assault, war, etc.)
What are the risk factors for blunt force trauma?

Some risk factors for blunt force trauma are very specific to your life and circumstances. Others are more general. Some examples of risk factors include:

Driving automobiles or frequent encounters with them
Not using safety items like seat belts or protective gear like helmets for sports, bicycling, etc.
Age, especially with decreased balance, strength or flexibility that happens naturally over time
Jobs or activities that put you at risk, like working around machinery, large or massive items, etc.
How blunt force trauma causes injuries

There are four specific ways that blunt force trauma can damage your body:

Strain (pull): This happens when forces pull body parts in opposite directions, like with a joint dislocation.
Shear (twist or bend): This can happen when forces push different sections of your body or a body part in different (but not opposite) directions. That’s what happens with injuries like whiplash.
Compression (crush): This happens when forces press on or crush body parts, like with cauliflower ear. It can also happen with internal swelling. That can cause dangerous conditions like compartment syndrome or brain swelling.
Overpressure (crush and break or burst): This is when there’s too much pressure on a body part and the part breaks, bursts or splits. That’s how skin lacerations from blunt trauma happen. It can also damage organs and other parts inside your body.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How is blunt force trauma diagnosed?

Healthcare providers can diagnose blunt force trauma using a combination of the following:

Imaging tests: Imaging tests are incredibly valuable for diagnosing and treating blunt force trauma. These tests can include X-rays and CT scans for most injuries. In some cases, ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be better (especially with soft tissue injuries).
A physical exam: Providers will examine your body and the injury, looking and feeling with their hands or listening with a stethoscope. They do that to search for signs of blunt force trauma and determine its effects.
A neurological exam: When there’s a chance of brain, spinal cord or nerve injury, providers will do a neurological exam.
Lab tests: Blood and urine tests may reveal hidden damage to your internal organs from blunt force trauma.
Your symptoms: If you’re conscious, your healthcare provider will ask about your symptoms. But if you’re not, the other exams will give them the information they need.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is blunt force trauma treated?

The severity of the injury and the affected body part(s) are key factors in treating blunt force trauma. Some examples include:

Rest, ice, compression, elevation (RICE): Minor injuries like bruises may only need simple treatments.
Skin closure: Lacerations may need bandaging or closure with stitches or staples.
Immobilization: Broken bones may need a splint, cast or another way to keep the affected body part from moving.
Medications: Pain relievers, either over the counter or prescribed, are common for lingering symptoms of blunt force trauma.
Surgery: Internal injuries may need surgery to repair or treat. Severe fractures may need internal fixation with metal hardware like rods, pins screws or plates.
Hospital care: More severe injuries may need a hospital stay, especially when you have injuries that affect your brain, heart, lungs or other vital organs.

Other treatments are possible depending on the situation and circumstances. Because treatments can vary so widely, your healthcare provider is the best person to tell you about the options for your specific case.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
Can blunt force trauma be prevented?

There are several things you can do to prevent blunt force trauma or lower your odds of having it.

To prevent blunt force trauma when driving or riding in motor vehicles, remember the following:

Wear your seatbelt in moving vehicles, like automobiles, industrial vehicles, airplanes, etc.
Use other automobile safety measures properly. Examples include positioning your seat (so airbags can deploy safely) and headrests (so they can protect you from whiplash).
If you’re driving, follow speed laws, slow down when road conditions aren’t ideal and avoid distracted driving.
Make sure children in your care know how to use safety gear like seatbelts and helmets correctly.
Don’t let children drive vehicles intended for adults, like all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), motorbikes and golf carts.

Here are some ways you can try to prevent blunt force trauma from everyday activities:

Limit tripping hazards and clutter in your home.
Follow manufacturer instructions when using ladders and stepstools.
Install grab bars and/or nonslip mats in bathrooms and showers.
Wear grip-sole socks or shoes in or around the house if they’ll help.
If you’re a pedestrian, use crosswalks and ALWAYS look before crossing (even if you’re sure you have the right of way).
Wear the proper safety gear for any activity.
Sit out from sports if you have an injury because it can make you vulnerable to even worse injuries.
Be cautious about wearing headphones or earbuds during activities like walking or cycling. They might keep you from hearing sounds that would alert you to danger.

Living With
-----------
When should I go to the emergency room?

You should go to the emergency room or get emergency medical care if you experience a blunt force injury and then you:

Lose consciousness, especially if the injury involved your head
Start having trouble breathing or feel changes in your heart rate
Have a bone that seems visibly broken
Have symptoms of severe blood loss (hemorrhage), especially if you take blood thinners
Have severe pain, especially if it feels much worse than what you’d expect from the visible effects of the injury
Have an eye injury from blunt trauma, especially when it affects your vision
Cough or vomit blood
Notice a color change in your pee to pink
Can’t move your body or a body part the usual way
Are pregnant and are involved in a motor vehicle crash

Getting medical care quickly is absolutely vital with severe blunt force trauma injuries. That’s why experts call the first 60 minutes after an injury “the golden hour” for people with life-threatening injuries.

What questions should I ask my doctor?

Some questions you may want to ask your healthcare provider include:

How severe is my injury?
What’s the outlook for my case?
Which treatment option(s) do you recommend?
Are there any side effects or complications I should watch for, and what should I do if I notice them?

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Blunt force trauma can cause injuries inside your body that your eyes can’t see. Maybe it’s whiplash from a fender-bender or a bruised foot from dropping a tool while working around the house. The pain and damage are no less disruptive to your life. Knowing when you need expert medical care can make a big difference. And getting timely treatment can help you recover faster and could even save your life.
