Bohn’s Nodules
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/bohn-nodules

Overview
--------
(Not available)

What is
-------
(Not available)

What are
--------
Bohn’s nodules (sometimes called Bohn nodules or oral inclusion cysts) are harmless cysts in your newborn’s mouth. They form along your baby’s gums. Like Epstein pearls, they’re small, whitish bumps that don’t hurt your baby and go away on their own within a few months of birth. Your baby doesn’t need any treatment.

That’s reassuring, right? But only if you know what you’re seeing is indeed Bohn’s nodules. Don’t try to guess or diagnose it yourself. If you see tiny bumps or anything unusual in your baby’s mouth, call your pediatrician. There’s a good chance you’re seeing harmless cysts. But it’s important for your pediatrician to rule out other issues like natal teeth, which may need treatment.

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
What do Bohn’s nodules look like?

Bohn’s nodules are tiny, round bumps that are white, gray or yellowish in color. They can be as tiny as the tip of a pin. Some are a bit bigger — up to about 3 millimeters wide. They typically appear in clusters of two to six, but it’s also possible to see just one.

These bumps appear along the alveolar ridges, or the bony, thickened gum tissue that holds your baby’s tooth sockets. Your baby has two alveolar ridges — one at the top of their mouth and one at the bottom. Bohn’s nodules most often form along the top (maxillary) alveolar ridge. And they can form on either side of the ridge — the one facing you or the one facing the back of your baby’s mouth.

You shouldn’t notice any redness or discoloration around Bohn’s nodules. They’ll feel firm or hard if you touch them. These cysts (sack-like structures) have a substance called keratin inside of them. Keratin is one of the proteins the body uses to make skin and hair.

Are Bohn’s nodules painful?

No. Bohn’s nodules don’t cause your newborn any pain or discomfort. And they don’t cause issues with feeding or affect how your baby’s teeth come in.

What causes Bohn’s nodules?

Experts believe Bohn’s nodules form when leftover salivary gland tissue gathers in one spot. Your baby’s salivary glands form during fetal development. Sometimes, a bit of extra tissue remains, and it forms into tiny cysts. Experts don’t know exactly why this happens. But they know these cysts are harmless and temporary.

Bohn’s nodules aren’t due to an infection. So, you don’t have to worry about them spreading to anyone else in your family.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How are Bohn nodules diagnosed?

Pediatricians can easily diagnose Bohn’s nodules by examining your baby’s mouth. Your baby likely won’t need any tests unless your pediatrician thinks the bumps are natal teeth. If so, your baby may need an X-ray of their mouth to help determine if intervention is necessary.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
What is the treatment for Bohn’s nodules?

Bohn’s nodules don’t need treatment or removal. They’ll naturally go away on their own within your baby’s first few months of life. Providers rarely see Bohn’s nodules last beyond 3 months of age.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
What can I expect if my baby has Bohn nodules?

Bohn’s nodules don’t hurt your baby. They’ll go away without treatment. Providers haven’t linked them with any complications or future issues.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
When should I call my pediatrician?

Tell your pediatrician if you notice whitish bumps in your baby’s mouth or anything else that concerns you. They’ll tell you if the bumps are Bohn’s nodules or something else — like Epstein pearls (another type of harmless cyst) or natal teeth. And they’ll make sure your baby gets any care they need.

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
Your baby’s smile makes your heart melt. But it might also make your mind race with worry if you see something you don’t expect — like white bumps along their gums. If your pediatrician tells you these bumps are Bohn’s nodules, you have nothing to worry about. These are very common and harmless.

Your instincts to check for something out of the ordinary are good, though — and you should keep following them. Always tell your pediatrician if something worries you. They’ll help you understand what’s happening and make sure your baby gets the care they need.
