Brenner Tumor
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/brenner-tumor

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Symptoms of a Brenner tumor

Most Brenner tumors don’t cause symptoms. Healthcare providers typically find them by chance when you get imaging tests for other reasons.

But BT symptoms can include:

A buildup of fluid in your abdomen (ascites)
A mass in your pelvis
Fullness, pain or pressure in your abdomen

These symptoms may have many other causes. It’s important to see a healthcare provider so they can find the problem.

Brenner tumor causes

Researchers don’t know the exact cause of Brenner tumors. In general, tumors form when cells grow uncontrollably. With BTs, researchers think this happens in small groups of cells near your fallopian tubes and ovaries called Walthard cell nests.

Loss of function of CDKN2A, a tumor suppressor gene, may cause benign BTs to turn into borderline BTs.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose this condition

In most cases, healthcare providers find a Brenner tumor by chance when you get imaging tests of your pelvis for other reasons.

If you have symptoms, your healthcare provider may recommend tests like:

Ultrasound
CT scan
MRI

To diagnose the type of Brenner tumor, you’ll need to have it surgically removed. Your surgeon will then send samples to a lab. A pathologist will look at the cells under a microscope to determine the type.

Management and Treatment
------------------------
How is it treated?

Surgery is the main form of treatment for all types of Brenner tumors. Your surgeon will remove all or part of the tumor. Removing it usually resolves any symptoms. It’s also necessary to determine the type of tumor.

If the tumor is malignant, you may need other treatments. This may include chemotherapy or radiation, for example. Malignant BTs are very rare. So, healthcare providers don’t have a standardized treatment plan for them. Your healthcare team will walk you through your options.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
(Not available)

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
(Not available)

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
A tumor diagnosis, especially a rare one, can cause a flood of different emotions. The volume of new information can be overwhelming. The good news is that Brenner tumors are often benign. Your healthcare provider will go over the next steps. Lean on them — and loved ones — for support.
