Bulimia Nervosa
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/9795-bulimia-nervosa

Overview
--------
(Not available)

Symptoms and Causes
-------------------
Bulimia has common signs and symptoms but it may look and feel different for each person who experiences it.

Bulimia nervosa symptoms

Symptoms of bulimia include:

Eating large amounts of food in one sitting (binging)
Getting rid of the food you just ate by purging
A fear of gaining weight and a willingness to do whatever it takes to lose weight
A loss of control when it comes to eating
Low self-esteem and low self-worth
Shame or guilt after eating
Depression, anxiety, extreme mood swings or substance use
Fainting
Constipation
Irregular menstrual periods
Muscle weakness
Bloodshot eyes
Facial swelling (chipmunk cheeks)

This condition can look different for each person. For example, you might not eat a large amount of food before purging. Sometimes, any amount of food can trigger negative feelings that may make you want to purge. The method for purging may also vary.

Bulimia causes

The exact cause of bulimia nervosa isn’t known. But researchers think it may be a combination of genetics and learned behaviors.

Popular culture and the media may put pressure on you to have a certain body type. These outside influences can affect your body image and self-esteem. Also, feeling stressed, upset or out of control may all lead to the development of this eating disorder.

Risk factors of bulimia

Bulimia nervosa can affect anyone. You’re more at risk of the condition if you’re:

An adolescent or young adult
Biologically related to someone diagnosed with an eating disorder
Diagnosed with a mental health condition like anxiety or depression
Female
Complications of bulimia

This eating disorder comes with many health risks. These are dangerous and many can be life-threatening. Complications may include:

Abnormal heart rhythm (arrhythmia)
Damage to your intestines and stomach
Dental issues (tooth erosion, translucent teeth or decay)
Esophagus inflammation (esophagitis) and tears
GERD
Heart failure
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Increased risk of suicide
Malnutrition and dehydration
Swollen cheeks
Throat and stomach ulcers
Type 2 diabetes

Treating bulimia early may prevent complications and any long-term effects that the condition may cause.

Diagnosis and Tests
-------------------
How doctors diagnose bulimia

To diagnose this condition, your healthcare provider will perform a physical examination. They’ll ask you about your medical history and symptoms. It’s OK to be nervous when talking with your provider. But they want to help you get better and won’t judge you. So, it’s important to be honest about your eating habits and behaviors.

Your provider will review your symptoms with the criteria in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5-TR). They may ask you the following questions:

Do you have repeated episodes of binge eating?
Do you feel a lack of control over your eating?
Do you engage in purging behaviors?
Have you experienced binge eating at least once a week for three months?
Does your body weight or shape have a strong influence on your self-image?

There aren’t any tests to specifically diagnose this eating disorder. Your provider may order tests to see how it affects your health. These tests may include:

Blood tests
Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Kidney function test
Urinalysis

Management and Treatment
------------------------
Dr. Susan Albers explains the treatment options for bulimia nervosa.

How is bulimia treated?

A healthcare provider may recommend the following treatment options:

Therapy. Cognitive behavioral therapy is a type of talk therapy. You’ll meet with a therapist and set goals to adjust how your thoughts affect your behaviors.
Nutritional counseling. You’ll work with a registered dietitian or counselor to build a healthier relationship with the foods you eat.
Medication. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are a type of antidepressant. They may reduce binge eating and vomiting episodes. They may also treat anxiety and depression.
Support groups. Support groups can be a helpful addition to other treatments. Connecting with others who share similar experiences may be beneficial to your recovery.

There isn’t one treatment that works best for everyone. You may need to try different techniques or paths to reach your goals.

When should I see my healthcare provider?

If your relationship with food causes you stress or gets in the way of your everyday life, you should talk to a healthcare provider.

Seek immediate treatment if you also have any of the following symptoms:

Chest pain
Dizziness
Fainting
Heart palpitations
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
Severe sore throat

If you’re thinking about suicide, someone is available to help you 24/7. Call or text 988. This is the Suicide and Crisis Lifeline (U.S.). Don’t hesitate to reach out, even if you’re not in a crisis.

If you’re in immediate danger, call 911 or your local emergency services number.

Outlook / Prognosis
-------------------
Bulimia recovery

Recovery is possible. It takes time to get there. Your healthcare providers will work with you to create a treatment plan that’s right for you and your symptoms. Your therapist will help you set realistic goals and work with you to achieve them.

It’s important to know that relapses are possible. A relapse is when you go back to unhealthy behaviors after a period of practicing healthy ones. It’ll be easy to see a relapse as a failure, but it’s not a judgment of who you are. Recovery is challenging and hard work. But remember, you’re never alone. Your care team can help you get back on track. They’ll make adjustments to your treatment plan as needed.

If untreated, you may develop serious, often life-threatening complications. It’s important to seek treatment if you haven’t already.

Prevention
----------
(Not available)

Living With
-----------
(Not available)

Additional Common Questions
---------------------------
What is it like living with bulimia?

Everyone’s experience with this eating disorder is different. Here are some examples of what it might feel like to live with bulimia:

I worry about going out to eat in public because I don’t want to eat too much too fast and not have access to a restroom.
I avoid looking at myself in mirrors because I don’t like the way I look.
I feel like the only control I have in my life is purging.
Binging is comforting when I’m stressed, but I eat so fast that I don’t even taste the food.
I feel so guilty (like I committed a crime) after eating. I feel like purging is the only way I can undo the damage.

If these thoughts sound familiar, it’s time to reach out to a healthcare provider or mental health professional. They can help you build a better relationship with food and your self-image.

A note from Cleveland Clinic
----------------------------
It’s common to worry about what you eat and your body size. But bulimia is much more than that. It’s an intense preoccupation that can lead to many health complications. If you think you have this condition, don’t hesitate to seek help. With the right medical care and mental health support, recovery is possible. Take the first step toward protecting your well-being by talking to a healthcare provider.
